        
    
      Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 16, 2009 A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday, January 16, 2009, at 10:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Ms. Duke 
Mr. Fisher 
Mr. Kohn 
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser 
Mr. Stern
Mr. Warsh Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, Sniderman, and Tracy, Associate Economists 
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Slifman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Messrs. Leahy and Levin, Ms. Liang, Mr. Reifschneider, and Ms. Stefansson, Associate Directors, Divisions of International Finance, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics,  Research and Statistics, and Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors     Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, respectively  Messrs. Altig, Potter, Rudebusch, Sellon, and Sullivan, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, San Francisco, Kansas City, and Chicago, respectively  Mr. Gavin, Vice President, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
   Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on January 16, 2009 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  The principal item on the agenda today is to have a preliminary discussion on inflation objectives and that range of communication issues, and I will come back and provide some more introduction to that shortly.  We also should take the opportunity to talk a bit about the structure of the FOMC meeting, which we can then apply to the regular meeting coming up in about ten days. Before we get into the regular agenda, though, I would like in a moment to ask Scott Alvarez to describe the terms of the TreasuryFDICFed deal with Bank of America.  That deal was originally scheduled to take placeor to be announcedafter the close of markets today, and so my hope had been that I would be able to present this to you before completion or announcement.  In part because of market conditions, the bank asked for an acceleration to this morning, and so that news, obviously, is already out.  I apologize that we were surprised and werent able to provide as much advance warning as we would have liked.  In any case, I am going to turn to Scott and let him just outline what we did and why we did it.  The Richmond Bank was very much involved in this, as was New York.  After Scotts comments, President Lacker, if you would like to add anything, you are welcome at that point to do so, and then we will have any Q&A that people want to do.  Let me turn now to Scott to give us a quick overview of the transaction. MR. ALVAREZ. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying that a tremendous amount of effort went into this deal, and the folks at the Richmond Reserve Bankin particular the lawyers and the exam staff therewith somesupport from the New York staff did a phenomenal job in putting this together.  This proposal was motivated by significant losses that Bank of America announced this morning. There are two kinds of losses. They announced some losses that were a 
little above market expectations for Bank of America itself.  This is their first quarter of losses, and the market is now expecting that this is the first of several quarters of losses for Bank of America.  They are one of the more thinly capitalized banking 
        organizations, so losses for them are taken pretty seriously.  What was most important was a very large loss that Merrill Lynch declared for the fourth quarter today, much larger than market expectationsin the mid-20s pre-tax.  The concern was that a large loss on the Merrill Lynch acquisition, which Bank of America just closed on January 1, might shake market confidence in Bank of America itself. The proposal that Bank of America requested from us and that we ultimately agreed to provide is in two parts. One is a capital injection of $20 billion from the 
Treasury from the TARP fundsthat is in the form of preferred stock.  It is very much like the preferred stock that was issued in the CPP (capital purchase program) to other banking organizations, except that the interest rate is higher.  It is a uniform 8 percent interest rate right from the start, rather than 5 accelerating to 9, I believe, under the CPP.  The capital injection has some conditions tied to it.  One condition is that dividends be restricted to a penny a share per quarter for the next three years.  There is also an executive compensation requirement that is more severe than the 
executive compensation requirements that apply under the CPP but very much like the exec comp restrictions in the Citi deal.  So the highest management of Bank of America, roughly the top thirty officials, had their bonuses cut 40 percent for the next two years, and their bonuses are based on the 2007 performance.  There are also restrictions on corporate activities, on the use of corporate jets, and on various extra corporate expenditures, which are subject to Treasury review. In addition to the capital injection, the U.S. government agreed to provide some downside protection for a period of time on a pool of ring-fenced assets.  This part was also modeled on the Citi deal.  The maximum size of the pool is $118 billion.  
The pool includes a variety of residential and commercial real estate securities, including some structured instrumentsCDOs and the like.  The underlying assets 
include a range of prime, subprime, and alt-A assets.  There are also some derivativesin fact, a large derivative book on real estate and other corporate assetsand some leveraged loans.  The term of the downside protection is ten years on the residential-mortgage-based assets and five years on everything else.  The way it is structured, Bank of America has a deductible of $10 billion.  That is the first loss position on any losses in this pool. After the Bank of America loss position, the U.S. government will share losses on a 90/10 basis with Bank of America, the government 
taking the next 90 percent and Bank of America, 10 percent, for another $10 billion.  That $10 billion of losses is shared between the Treasury and the FDIC on a pari passu basis, which is slightly different from the Citi deal.  The Treasury will take $7 billion in losses potentially, and the FDIC is willing to take $2 billion. In exchange for providing that protection, the Treasury and the FDIC are getting $4 billion in preferred stock and some small amount of warrants as a premium.  The losses will be based on actual losses that are incurred in the maturity and sale of 
assets from the pool, not on mark-to-market losses.  So if the pool continues to exist after they have gone through that series of $20 billion in protection, then the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond stands ready to make a loan to Bank of America on the 
basis of the assets remaining in the pool.  That loan would be on a nonrecourse 
   basisso recourse only to the assets in the pool.  Again, Bank of America would share 10 percent of the losses alongside the Reserve Bank in that pool liquidation.  The Reserve Bank is getting a commitment fee on this loan that begins immediately on signing the documents.  The fee is 20 basis points on the outstanding amount of the assets, which represents the potential amount that the Reserve Bank could lend against.  Once the loan has been drawn, the Reserve Bank would also get an interest rate of OIS (overnight index swap) plus 300. That interest rate is the same that we have used in the Citi deal. The restrictions that I went through on the preferred stock that the Treasury gets are also part of the asset ring-fencing proposal and will last as long as the ring-fence continues to exist.  That is the summary of the deal.  President Lacker may have other comments to make, and I am happy to answer any questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. In putting this together, our staff benefited tremendously from what has been learned over the past two months in New York from trying to put pencil to paper and negotiate the details of the legal agreement pursuant to the term sheet for Citi.  We were able, at 
the margin, to improve in several respects on a couple of the provisions of this ring-fencing arrangement.  In our case, actually, the collateral isnt going to be the underlying securities.  It is going to be just Treasuries. But the loan agreement stipulates that the repayment amount is the amount of the outstanding balance of the loan minus the amount of credit losses they incur on the underlying assets.  In addition, we have a trigger point for advancing the credit that is a bit tighter than before and a couple of other minor things. But I want to thank the New York staff and the Board staff as well for doing a great job in helping us put this together. This obviously is an uncomfortable thing for any central bank to do. The terms of this deal are very consistent with the Citibank terms, so it seems like a consistent follow-through in terms of the conditions involved for the institution that triggered this intervention and the terms and structure of the intervention.  So we were happy to cooperate with the System in carrying this out. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks, President Lacker.  I agree with Jeff that this is uncomfortable. It is a significant improvement, I would say, over some of the things we have had to do in the past in that the Treasury obviously is taking by far the bulk of both the capital investment and the fiscal risk and the FDIC is fully engaged as well.  The FDIC also announced its intention to expand the loan guarantee program to allow for up to ten-year covered bond type of instruments, which will be interesting.  They are going to go out for comment on that, and we will see how that works out.  So they are very much engaged. I would make a couple of other points.  One is that we also had the benefit of knowing somewhat longer in advance than had been the case in other situations and so had more time to determine what strategy to follow.  I think the agreement will reflect that greater time and greater attention. Finally, and this perhaps anticipates some of our later discussion, we have been very attuned not only to the credit risks but also to the monetary policy implications of these deep-tail loans. We dont expect to have to make the loans, but if we do, we want to make sure that they dont create balance sheet problems in terms of our monetary policy.  Both in this case and in the final negotiation with Citi, we have worked it out in a way that, if we make loans, it will be on a tranched basis so that we wouldnt have to make a loan of $300 billion or $100 billion in one shotrather, somewhat smaller loans that could be better managed from a monetary policy point of view. So that is the overview. Let me see now if there are any questions for Scott, for me, or for Jeff. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  You may remember that, back when we first started down this path, we had a discussionat least I raised the subjectabout a decision tree and about our assessing possible outcomes.  I can say this in front of the group; this is an inside question.  After that discussion, President Geithner and I had 
  substantial phone conversations, and I was assured that there was a decision tree and that we were thinking through all the different possible outcomes.  My question is the following: What probability did we assign to this kind of problem arising from B of A, particularly when they announced the merger with Merrill?  I am curious as to whether we envisioned this as a possibility. If soand, of course, circumstances change over time, and nothing is perfectwhat reasonable probability did we assign when that merger was announced that we might have to step up to the plate?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a follow-up question that is not related to this about an outside response to a question that I anticipate. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the agreement took place over the Lehman Brothers weekend in a situation of considerable stress and anxiety.  But it was a freely negotiated agreement between Bank of America and Merrill.  There was no government assistance, and there was no request for government assistance.  It was a commercial decision.  At that time, we were actually quite happy to see it happen because we were concerned about the pressures on Merrill. But it was their decision, and we had no particular reason to think that there would be extraordinary losses in this case. Of course, the world has changed in just a few months, and this whole situation was stimulated by a call from Ken Lewis just a few weeks ago to the effect that the losses that Merrill Lynch was going to report at the end of the fourth quarter had risen on the order of $10 billion or $15 billion in just a couple of weeks, in terms of what they were reporting to Bank of America.  So these losses were not anticipated, certainly not at the time of the merger agreement, and they were actually quite a shock. We were a little disappointed in Bank of Americas monitoring in that they seemed a bit behind the curve in terms of following the developments at Merrill Lynch.  But there were enormous losses at Merrill Lynch that emerged very quickly and that surprised 
 Bank of America and us as well. I dont know if I am answering your question, but we did not anticipate this problem when the transaction was originally agreed to.  You had a follow-up question? MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a separate question:  How do we expect to counter concerns that we are basically underwriting greater concentration as we go through time?  In essence, what we are doing here is providing emergency lending to underwrite heavy concentration by virtue of a merger.  So I would just appreciate your thoughts or perhaps the thoughts of other members of the Committee on how we deflect that kind of concern if it arises in the marketplace. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It is a legitimate question, President Fisher.  This particular transaction, as I was just saying, was different from, say, Bear Stearns, where our intention was to arrange a merger in order to stabilize the company.  In this case, as I said, it was a freely undertaken business transaction in which the government was not involved. It is clear that, on the one hand, we are seeing a consolidation of firms and some increase in concentration. At the same time, the industry overall is shrinking and needs to shrink, and that is going to be a structural problem going forward.  I think the right approachand I have said this most recently in my speech this weekis that there needs to be a wholesale policy response to the question of too big to fail.  President Stern, of course, is very familiar with this issue and 
has written on it. That could involve breaking up firms.  It could also involve a tougher regulatory regime for so-called systemically relevant firms.  There are different ways to address it. It must be addressed.  It is very important to address. But right now we are doing the best that we can to address the immediate threats to the system.  I think we are making progress.  As I said before, the Feds role is still there, and it 
shouldnt be there at all ideally, but it is now at least subsidiary to the Treasury and the FDIC.  I am hopeful that going forward the Administration will be able to develop a systematic, comprehensive approach to the banking problems that will leave us out of it entirely, or at least keep us in our appropriate liquidity provision role.  So the answer to your question in short is that it is very important, but we cant address it simultaneously with addressing the near-term threats to the system. But the regulatory and legislative response clearly has to address those issues. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, I pray that we keep this in mind, as obviously we are doing, as we go through time because our actions might counter our intentions if we are not careful. Thank you for addressing the issue.  I appreciate it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think that speaking about it is, obviously, one useful way of counteracting the concern.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. My question was whether the Treasury had a criterion for when they thought ring-fencing was the most appropriate way to deal with a problem versus alternative ways of dealing with these problems.  We have had two cases now in which we have done ring-fencing. The circumstances have been very different.  So is there a criterion that is being worked with the Treasury and the FDIC for when those are appropriate actions to take and when other options should be considered instead? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, first, there are three classes of firms.  There are the so-called healthy firms that are eligible for the CPP.  There are the very sick firms that require emergency assistance.  And somewhere in the middle are the targeted-investment programs 
Citi and BAC are now the two examples of that.  These are firms that were not immediately in a state of failure but were obviously under serious stress, and there is a set of criteria for those firms and the way we approach those firms. 
   The specific combination of capital and ring-fencing is, to some extent, a matter of judgmentyou know, looking at the situation of the individual firm, the market conditions, and so on. But there is a general feelingI think we all may be seeing thisthat the preferred capital approach is reaching its limits.  The markets dont view preferred capital injections as being a perfect substitute for common equity. On the other hand, there is resistance on the Treasurys part to injecting significant amounts of common equity because they dont want to own the bank, among other things.  So you need another mechanism, and ideally the mechanism 
would be a good bank/bad bank or a purchase of assetsa way of getting some of the downside 
risk off the balance sheet. This has been the most effective way essentially to provide contingent capital without creating a capital instrument.  As we go forward, I expect to see more combinations of what are effectively capital injections and removal or ring-fencing or insuring troubled assets.  I think we will see more of that going forward, but a substantial amount of individual analysis of this particular case led to the particular combination of measures.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I just wanted to follow up on a couple of things that President Fisher asked about and add a bit of color to your response about earnings.  There are press reports today coming out of the Bank of America earnings call that suggest that they learned about these losses only in the days following their shareholder vote on December 5 or something like that.  These were actually accumulating from just early November, and the erosion of earnings took place over a five-week period at Merrill, so they accreted within the organization.  They knew about it to some extent, as it was happening in late November and early December. In response to Richards question about a decision tree, the way this played out over the Lehman weekend is notable.  This initiative of the two firms was a direct response to hearing a 
   conclusive, definitive statement from the Secretary about his unwillingness to provide government support for Lehman.  So for all that has been said about the handling of the Lehman case, the difference between the orderly resolution of Merrill, given this merger, and what would have transpired had they tried to take a chance on going it alone has to be counted as a beneficial side effect of Lehmana kind of rare, direct evidence of some incentive effects here. One thing I am concerned about with these ring-fencing aspectsthis is a comment to you, Ericis that they leave a substantial part of the risk, both upside and some downside, on the books of the institution. So they have the inconvenient property that defraying some of the costs of that risk is part of the calculus of anyone considering injecting new equity in the firm.  Some prospective equity investor that takes them a bit out of the hole of this thing is going to be benefiting existing debt holders as well.  This debt-overhang problem ought to be the subject of some attention here because ultimately we want to get away from dependence on government support. To some extent, these preferred injections, because they are dilutive, have us in a tipping point kind of thing in which equity holders are scared off by the prospects of future dilutive injections. So we are sort of stuck with just the government as the potential equity source until they come far enough out of it that the tail risk for debt holders is large enough.   I think that deserves some thought.  Initially we took a look at an SPV (special purpose vehicle) approach, more like Bear, specifically for this reasonthat it would lift the assets out of the institution and help us get more rapidly to a point where we didnt have this debt-overhang problem.  My understanding is that there was a concern at Treasury that this should resemble, as closely as possible, the Citi deal, so that it was patterned after that and could be sold as kind of a continuation of the Citi-like structure.  This issue about common versus preferred was a surprise in thisin December we learned that there was a real concern about the appearance of B of As 
tangible common equity ratio, which is below that of some top-tier banks like JPMorgan but above that of Citi.  They were concerned about the erosion of that, and that was their chief investor-confidence issue that motivated this.  Understanding that a little better and what motivates that on the part of the investor community would be useful as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Just a quick question. Given the way AIG was structured and the possibilities of being able to pay back the loan with a sale of assets or operating units, and Citicorp is now looking to sell off units, have we given any thought to requiring that, if these things arent dealt with even in an extended period of time, they would be required to sell off units to pay this back?  That would address some of Richards and my concerns about the enabling process that we are providing for this continued increase in concentration of these resources that are themselves unsound. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I would welcome any assistance from an appropriate governor or supervisor. We have been concerned about Citi from a supervisory perspective for some time.  One of the key problems was the difficulty of managing and dealing with risk in such a complex and loosely structured organization.  So wethe Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkhad been pushing Citi to try to rationalize, sell off assets, refocus, and improve risk management and management competency for some time.  That wasnt motivated primarily by a concentration issue but was just trying to make Citi a more viable firm.  Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  A couple of things. First, in the Citi case, as an example, the markets are putting a lot of pressure on them to slim down and sell off assets.  I think that, as quickly as they can rightly restore their brand and their business, they and their shareholders will have every 
 incentive to do so. I think that is already happening.  Under the terms of the CPP, negotiated chiefly by the Treasury, the company has the option to get rid of the government ownership at different periods. I think it will be a sign of strength when they are able to do so. In addition, there is an incentiveand Scott can correct me on the termsthat, if they were to pay back the government by year-end 09, then the options, the warrants in effect, that the government would get would be half what they otherwise would get.  So generally under the CPP you will see the strongest of this group looking to distinguish themselves for being stronger, by November/December of this yearto try to say that they are different, that the options and warrants they have given the government will now be reduced because of the redemption feature.  
But in square answer to your question, there isnt some compulsion that somehow the government needs to be paid back first among the order of preferences for their liquidation. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Thank you. Just coming back to President Fishers question:  How are we going to play this going forward?  Should we expect more deals in the category of Citi and B of A?  How are we going to draw the line sometime in 2009 about how to do this? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, speaking for myself, I am not going to draw the line somewhere that involves the failure of a firm the size of Bank of America.  But that said, we need to find better solutions to this problem, and the new teamGeithner, Summers, and Christina Romeris very focused on trying to use the available TARP money, which of course was just approved yesterday, plus other funding and other authorities, to develop a more systematic and more comprehensive approach to the banking crisis.  We have been trying to support that analytically, and we are certainly also going to support it politically, because it is 
  very important that this be done both in a consistent and a well-thought-out way and that fiscal authorities take the appropriate responsibility. So let me just say that I know President Lacker was uncomfortable with this arrangement.  I am certainly very uncomfortable with it.  But for whatever reason, our system is not working the way it should in order to address the crisis in a quick and timely way.  Until the reinforcements arrive, I dont think we have much choice but to try to work with other parts of the government to prevent a financial meltdown.  But I am very sympathetic to the view that the faster we can get a comprehensive, appropriate fiscal responseand that is the goal of the new Administrationthe better off the country will be and the better off the Federal Reserve will be. Okay. If there are no other questions, maybe we could turn to the main topic of inflation objectives. Let me make just a couple of very short introductory comments.  First of all, obviously, we have talked about this issue many times before.  I think in 1995 President Yellen was involved in a debate or a discussion on this topic, so it is an oldie but goodie.  The reason that there has been interestand I feel this interest has welled up to some extent from the Committee as a wholeis that, in the current situation, there are some circumstances that might make an explicit numerical objective more attractive. There are a number of considerations, but the two I would mention are, first, that we do face, if not deflation, certainly some disinflation; and disinflation, if it proceeds too quickly, can be counterproductive because it raises real interest rates.  So to the extent that we can, through expectations management or policy communication, reduce disinflationary pressures, that is a positive.  This is one way perhaps to do that.  At the same time that we are using every power we 
have to try to fight this incredible crisis, there are concerns on the other side that, by expanding our balance sheet and the like, we risk inflation increasing in the medium term.  It is important 
  for us to communicate that we will be effective and timely in removing that stimulus, so that we will not have an inflation problem during the exit from our current policies.  In that respect, there may be some special features of the current environment that make this topic worth thinking about once again. Now, we have been through this process a number of times.  As I mentioned, we have made some steps in this direction with our communication strategyour projections, for example, particularly the long-term projections we are planning for January.  So I think the question is whether we want to take another step.  If so, what should it be?  We all agreeand we have discussed it also on numerous occasionsthat this has to be managed very carefully from a political perspective.  I think we need to go slowly on that front.  Don and I and the staff met this morning with some representatives of the Administration.  I did not detect any strong opposition on the substance, but they didnt want to incur heavy political costs themselves or use up political capital at the beginning of the Administration.  Their view was that whatever we did needed to be very carefully managed to avoid getting blown out of proportion in the political 
sphere. So we will work very carefully and closely with the Administration in thinking about this, not only in the substantive details but also in terms of the political communication. One point that was made in the meeting this morning, which may affect our thinking on timing if we do decide to go forward, is that the new President has already appointed one member of the Board and will have two more slots to fill.  We should pay attention to the schedule of appointments, and to the extent that appointments by the new President can be known and can be consulted in this process, it might ease the political consideration somewhat.  That is something we may have to take into account, and it may somewhat affect our timing. 
                                                       So we do want to discuss today a bit of the substance of what we would like to do.  But I think we should all have a sensitivitywhatever steps we taketo the need to do it very carefully from a political perspective and perhaps think about the extent of the change, the step we want to take, to balance a more dramatic or discrete step against whatever additional costs or risks there might be from a political perspective.  I just want to emphasize that and note that it probably suggests that we should go a little more slowly than at the January meeting.  Certainly it is a good idea at this point to get a sense of the Committees preferences to give me guidance in doing my consultation and getting feedback on further steps. Let me turn now to Brian Madigan to introduce the topic, and then we will do a go-round on this issue. Brian. MR. MADIGAN.1  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  You have made some of the points that I was planning on making, so let me turn directly to the questions that the staff circulated for discussion at this meeting.  The first question is on the principal benefits and costs of an explicit objective for inflation.  One of the key issues in this regard is the consistency of a numerical price objective with the Federal Reserves dual mandate.  Unlike some other central banks, the Federal Reserve is charged with promoting maximum employment as well as price stability.  Some FOMC members have previously expressed concerns about this consistency.  Thus, one of the questions for your discussion is, Do you see any conflict with the dual mandate in setting an inflation objective?That question is posed in a somewhat abstract fashion, and your answer to it may depend on how a numerical inflation objective would work in practicea set of issues that is teed up in question 2. In particular, how would the Committees conduct of policy be affected by the quantification of its price objective? For example, would the specification of the price objective mean that the Committee would put more weight than at present on deviations of inflation from its objective 
and less weight on deviations of output and employment from their steady-state values?  Or would you anticipate that a numerical price objective would be used primarily as a device to make the Committees intentions clearer and, thus, to help anchor inflation expectations so that the short-run conduct of policy would be little affected?  A related question is the effect of a numerical price objective on the Committees policy choices when it is concerned about the risks of financial 
instability.  For example, in circumstances in which inflation was projected to remain near target but asset-price developments pointed to incipient financial instability, 1 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are attached to this transcript (appendix 1). 
        would the Federal Reserve be inappropriately constrained from using its monetary policy tools to help address the emerging financial instability? Or would you argue that monetary policy tools should be used only in such cases to address the potential effects of the financial instability on output or inflation and, thus, that there is no conflict? The third question goes further into the general framework for establishing an inflation target. In establishing an objective, do you think that the Federal Reserve should set specific time frames for comparing realized inflation with its target?  Would it set timetables for the return of inflation to target following a deviation? Question 4 raises the issue as to whether the Committee should establish an inflation objective or an objective for a gradually increasing price level.  Theoretically, a price-level objective has certain desirable properties.  At a basic level, a credible commitment to a price-level objective should ease households and businesses long-term planning by eliminating the base drift that can occur under inflation targeting. Moreover, in potentially deflationary circumstances, it might be helpful for the central bank to make clear that any undershoots of the desired price path in the near future would be recouped down the road through above-average inflation that would bring the level of prices back to the desired path.  In principle, building in this error correction would help keep medium-term inflation expectations from falling excessively in response to inflation undershoots and thus would help prevent inappropriate increases in real interest rates.  However, a number of difficult 
questions surround the possible establishment of a price-level target.  Would the public view such a target as credible?  Or would analysts be concerned that the Fed might have difficulty meeting its price-level target or that it might eventually renege on its commitment to permit higher rates of inflation in the future, if necessary to offset temporarily low rates of inflation in the near term? Indeed, you yourselves 
might be uncomfortable with a policy that intentionally pursues relatively high rates of inflation, even as an offset to previous undershoots.  For example, you might be concerned about the implications for economic and financial stability of those temporarily higher rates of inflation partly because you might worry about your ability to subsequently bring inflation back down to its optimal level. Questions 5, 6, and 7 focus on certain practical aspects of setting an inflation target. Should the objective be framed as a single number or a range?  What price index should be used?  What inflation buffer, if any, is appropriate? Has the current episode of a very large negative demand shock led you to revise up your views of the appropriate inflation buffer? Alternatively, do you see the present downside risk to output as sufficiently large as to warrant a temporarily higher objective for inflation? The final question addresses the relationship of a quantitative inflation objective to other aspects of the Committees communications.  At the December meeting, participants generally seemed to agree with the subcommittees recommendation to collect and publish longer-term projections on a quarterly basis.  The SEP (summary of economic projections) questionnaire would ask each participate to provide your 
    best assessment of the rate to which each variable would converge over the longer term (say, five to six years from now) in the absence of shocks and assuming appropriate monetary policy. An important question for todays discussion is how 
such projections would relate to a medium-term inflation objective.  There are at least two possibilities. In one view, the establishment of a medium-term inflation objective would obviate longer-term projections. In this view, longer-term projections are useful solely because of the information they provide about the Committees inflation objective. Indeed, some participants may be concerned that publication of longer-term projections of GDP growth and the unemployment rate could be interpreted incorrectly as implying that the Committee has speed limits on growth and employment.  Under an alternative approach, the Committee would both establish a numerical inflation objective and extend its current projections process to include long-term projections for output growth, unemployment, and inflation.  The advantage of this approach is that it would allow the Committee to present, in its summary of economic projections, a fully articulated picture of the economic outlook and how the Committees conduct of policy was intended to be consistent with 
closing any output and inflation gaps over time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That concludes my prepared remarks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there any questions for Brian? If not, would anyone like to comment on this issue? I see President Yellen.  President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This topic, as we have seen in previous discussion, is bedeviled by difficult issues. But in the spirit of the pragmatic responses that we have taken throughout these challenging times, I would like to take a straightforward approach.  I am going to organize my remarks around two questions.  First, what is the communication 
problem we now face regarding inflation and inflation expectations? Second, is there a solution that we can implement quickly and readily?  I agree with the characterization that you offered, Mr. Chairman:  The main communication problem we now face is that most of us anticipate a period that may be quite extended in which inflation will be below the mandate-consistent rate, even with monetary policy pulling out all the stops, especially given that we are at the zero bound. That can result in a pernicious increase in real interest rates.  So we do need to communicate very clearly that such a decline in inflation is both unwelcome and undesirable and 
  that we will do everything possible to return inflation over time toward higher levels consistent with the dual mandate. But I also agree with your remark that a second problem has developed, and we need to address it, too. There is growing concern that the Fed is printing money with abandon to stimulate the economy, and the combination of trillion dollar deficits and trillions of dollars of money creation can have only one outcome in the long run, which is high inflation that debases the currency.  Now, I think this reasoning is completely misguided, but it is out there, and I think we need to consider it because it is dangerous for our credibility as an institution.  So I also think we have to say that we are not willing to tolerate very high inflation. I think uncertainty about what our inflation goals are could be reduced by clear communication about our expected path for the economy and especially inflation.  Greater transparency about how we think the future will likely unfold could help anchor inflationary expectations and reduce their dispersion, which is now very large.  But our existing FOMC projections, which have the three-year forecast horizon, obviously arent up to the task. Given the enormous negative shocks to the economy over the past year, our forecast for inflation over the next three years falls quite low, and that may support the deflationary fears of some.  In addition, those who are worried about an inflationary surge may argue that a three-year horizon is too short to display the full extent of inflationary consequences of our balance sheet policies.  The obvious solution to this problem is to provide economic projections with a longer horizon, and that is exactly what the Subcommittee on Communications recommended in December.  Based on the trial run we conducted, these projections, especially with the rich narrative that accompanies them, appear to be useful in conveying important information about the Committees goals and the strategies for achieving them over time.  Especially under current 
      circumstances, I think there are clear benefits from that approach, and I hope that we can decide to implement the subcommittees recommendation. The enunciation of an explicit numerical inflation objective is certainly another possibility. It is one I have long been in favor of doing, but I dont expect the associated gains from transparency and better anchoring of inflation expectations to be a lot larger than those that we would achieve just from extending the forecast horizon.  I am concerned that there are a number of subtle issues in setting a numerical objective that I would not be eager to rush through or just sweep aside in the interest of getting this done quickly.  Most important, I wouldnt want consideration of those issues to delay us from implementing the extended projections that we had recommended.  For example, among the issues I am concerned with, the issue of time horizon for an explicit numerical objectiveBrian asked about thisis not straightforward to answer.  Brians questions were all cast in terms of a medium-term objective, whereas in the past this Committees discussions have always been cast in terms of a long-term goal. I think that the distinction between long term and medium term is not semanticit is substantive. From macroanalysis, I consider short term as referring to less than, say, a year or two, medium term as ranging from around two to six years, and long term as anything beyond around six. Articulating a long-term inflation objective would be consistent with our past policy behavior and with, for example, the kind of optimal policy scenarios in recent Bluebooks that show convergence only after around a decade. In contrast, I would interpret a medium-term inflation objective as one that we would be committed to hitting within several years. Even during normal circumstances, this would often require deemphasizing the employment part of our dual mandate.  At this time, though, with such a huge adverse shock to navigate through, I dont think a medium-term inflation objective is necessarily even attainable. 
  There is a view among some economists that stating a medium-term inflation objective would go a long way toward achieving it, but I am not so confident in the power of our words.  I think that the inflationary psychology that exists right now is especially delicate and doesnt correspond well to our theoretical models. For example, my sense is that, in present circumstances, many people are really relieved by the recent fall in consumer prices, which has translated into a boost to real wages, after several years of being battered by ever-higher energy and food costs. That makes me skeptical about the desirability of right away setting a temporarily high medium-term objective for inflation.  In contrast, if falling prices and wages became entrenched, as in the Great Depression, I believe the psychology would change a lot, and a promise of higher inflation or a price-level target could prove useful.  It is something I wouldnt want to see taken off the table. In todays situation, though, I think an approach like that would be confusing and counterproductive.  Even if we agree on a long-term horizon for a numerical inflation objective, a lot of important issues remain regarding its formulation and communication. My preference is now, as it has been for some time, that we have a long-term inflation objective specified in terms of the total PCE price index.  We have had success with that in our Monetary Policy Report.  As we have discussed previously, I prefer a total measure to a core measure.  With respect to a specific number, I think the welfare function is pretty flat over a range of values, but I think an inflation buffer is appropriate because of potential adverse effects of downward nominal wage rigidity, especially in situations with low productivity growth.  Now that we have had a couple of brushes with deflation, all in all I have concluded that a long-term numerical inflation objective of 2 percent for the PCE price index would be preferable. 
 There are process issues about choosing a long-run inflation objective.  I believe that we should try, as a group, to arrive at consensus or general agreement among the full set of FOMC participants, not just by a formal vote of the members, which was in essence the decisionmaking process that was proposed in the last Bluebook where this was raised.  Consensus among participants is the way in which we usually decide communication issues, because everyone has to live with the consequences. If we do adopt an inflation objective, I think we should revisit it on an annual basis. Of course, if we do reach consensus on a numerical inflation objective, communication of that consensus is very important.  I think the objective needs to be announced in the context of a clear and convincing statement of our commitment to both parts of our dual mandate.  A single sentence in an FOMC statement, which was what the last Bluebook contained, doesnt seem sufficient to me.  I think we would need a special press release, and I think the long-term nature of the inflation objective would have to be clearly explained to the public in the context of the dual mandate.  I think we should stress that the implications for near-term economic and financial stability would always be taken into account in deciding how to move toward our inflation objective. So let me summarize what I see as the way forward.  Essentially, I am hopeful that extended projections along the lines recommended by the subcommittee can accomplish most of 
what we need right now in terms of better anchoring inflation expectations, and I believe that is something we can implement this month.  Ideally, sometime perhaps further in the future, we could also formulate an explicit long-term inflation objective to accompany our extended forecasts, and then the forecasts would naturally illuminate the path from the present to our long-run goals. But I wouldnt want to postpone implementing what the subcommittee proposed, which is four-fifths of a loaf, which is our extended projections.  I wouldnt want to postpone 
    that to potentially get a whole loaf with an inflation objective down the road.  Finally, I have said in the past, and would say again, that I think guidance on the path of future short-term interest rates that implicitly accompany our quarterly economic projections could be quite helpful in the current circumstances.  The market at this point has priced in a fairly steep upward trajectory to the path of the funds rate, at least relative to the Greenbook.  So I think there would be value in conducting a trial run on this issue to get a sense of whether that is workable. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We have had some work here by the staff about what kind of press release we might do, and the focus has been on explaining how it relates to the dual mandate in some particular situations.  So I think this is absolutely right. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I have argued at previous meetings, I am in favor of the Committees establishing a numerical objective for price stability and announcing that objective to the public.  My view of this is based on the importance of price stability and the effective functioning of our economy and the financial system.  In thinking through the details of how to implement such a numerical goal, I am guided by the important roles that credibility, commitment, and transparency play in our ultimately achieving this goal.  I believe that specifying a numerical objective for medium-term inflation would focus our policy discussions and help anchor expectations, preventing them from drifting either too high or too low.  By reducing the publics uncertainty about our goal, long-run expectations would become less responsive to changes in short-run inflation. Again, this should help enhance monetary policys flexibility to respond to economic shocks as we deem appropriate. Numerical specification appears to have been associated with better-anchored expectations in foreign countries that have adopted it.  It seems to have produced a moderate 
 improvement in monetary policy, and inflation outcomes have improved without negative consequences for output growth. But to be effective, the Committees stated commitment to the objective must be credible.  Transparency can help strengthen the credibility of our stated commitment.  Thus, in choosing specifics of how we implement the numerical objective, we 
should be guided by those that enhance our transparency and credibility in the process.  Just saying that we have an objective isnt enough.  We need to design mechanisms and take actions that help achieve that objective and make that objective and those mechanisms transparent. In normal times, when policy is implemented by a fed funds rate target, the path of the target itself can serve as a nominal anchor for the economy.  Including the funds rate in the set of variables included in our economic projections would be a way for the Committee to communicate how it planned to achieve its goal.  I know there has been some reluctance to do this for fear that it would undermine the Committees policy flexibility.  But reporting the central tendency and range of fourth-quarter averages of funds rates, as we do with the unemployment rate, wouldnt seem to be too constraining and would help inform the public about how we anticipate hitting our goal, thereby raising our credibility and our stated commitment. However, we are not operating in normal times at the moment.  Because our funds rate target is effectively zero and is expected to remain at that level for a while, the funds rate cannot now serve as a nominal anchor.  In implementing credit policy, we are operating without a controlling nominal anchor at this point, and this could jeopardize our ability to ensure price stability. Missing our goal could seriously undermine our credibility.  Thus, I think it behooves the Committee to do some serious thinking about how we ensure that the current credit policies we are pursuing today dont put price stability seriously at risk in the future.  This includes limits on the growth rate of our balance sheet overall or perhaps of individual credit programs.  At the 
    very least, we should be monitoring these and developing metrics to assess the implications of credit policies for the future of price stability. It would be a mistake, I believe, to declare a target and fail to conduct policy consistent with that target or fail to communicate how our current or future policies and actions relate to that target and that intermediate objective for price stability.  I dont think words or communication is enough.  They need to be linked to actions in some specific way. In terms of the details of implementation, there are some aspects about the design that I feel more strongly about than others, and some of the choices are interrelated.  For example, a longer-term horizon should mean a tighter control range.  A longer horizon makes the choice between headline and core less important.  A longer horizon in my view means that the choice of core would be less compelling.  Regarding which price index, in general I prefer a headline index, even though it is likely to be harder to control than the core in the short run.  I prefer headline because I do not want to convey the idea that we are insensitive to the wider array of prices that influence behavior.  It also affords us the opportunity to use core in our communications when explaining why we might or might not have policy react to a temporary blip in headline. This is similar to the practice in other central banks that have announced numerical goals.  I note that there is some justification for measures of inflation that include only the sticky price components, as some monetary models suggest that optimal policy should be aimed at stabilizing those sticky prices. But the core measures of inflation do not necessarily correspond to the sticky price sectors. For example, apparel prices are more volatile than food prices.  The experience of foreign banks, almost all of which use the CPI, gives us some indication that using the headline CPI can work. The headline CPI is the measure most understood by the public, and 
  unlike the PCE, it is not revised.  I think the fact that it is not revised is very important because it aids transparency.  The public and we will be in a better position of assessing whether we have achieved our goal when metrics arent revised.  That seems to me like a salient reason to prefer the CPI over the PCE. Of course, I think it will be important for us to consider how we will respond and communicate about inevitable misses from our target.  Presumably, the larger the miss, the more burdensome the communication requirements should be on us, similar to the requirement, for example, in the United Kingdom for a letter to the Chancellor.  Presumably, a miss should be calibrated also to the variability and measurement precision in the underlying inflation measure used. Small deviations from targets should not be considered misses, but large deviations clearly should require more explanation. Regarding a point goal versus a range, I continue to prefer a point goal.  In reality, there is a range around this point goal reflecting the precision with which policymakers can control inflation. This control range will differ depending on the inflation measure we use and the time horizon. However, I would be reluctant to announce such a range as part of our goal unless we could ensure that the public would not interpret this range as a tolerance range.  I think that may be a very difficult communication task. For headline CPI, I would be happy with a point target anywhere between 1 and 2 percent.  It is not as critical to mehaving a goal is the important part. I think that this is consistent with our goal of price stabilitythe estimated measurement error of the CPI being a little less than 1 percentand gives us a margin for reducing the chances of getting into the zero bound situation. Regarding the time horizon, I feel strongly that we need to specify a time horizon so that we can be held accountable for meeting or missing the goal.  If the horizon becomes too long, it 
 imposes less discipline on the Committee and therefore presumably reduces the benefits of a numerical goal in the first place.  So I oppose making the horizon much too long.  Because I favor using headline CPI, which is more difficult to control than the core, I am comfortable that something like a three-year horizon is appropriate and achievable, given the typical shocks that hit the economy and the volatility of the CPI measure.  If the Committee prefers a shorter 
horizon, that might be a reason to think more precisely about the core. Regarding targeting the price level versus inflationprice-level targeting I think has some attractive features, especially when we are near the zero bound, as we have talked about in the past couple of meetings.  We could operationalize this by defining an average inflation goal over the time period so that, if inflation increases above this average for a time, we would need to bring inflation below the average for a time in order to achieve our goal.  But I think it would be difficult to communicate price-level targeting to the public and get them to understand what we are doing and why we are doing it. The increased transparency of it persuades me that, at least as a practical matter, stating our objectives in terms of an inflation objective is probably preferable. Finally, I am in favor of the Committees including the longer-term projections for GDP growth and unemployment in its projections.  These would be interpreted as steady-state values for the variables, and I think that would be a good thing.  Presumably, in most situations our inflation goal will be our long-term projection for inflation.  As I said earlier, I am in favor of the Committees including forecasts for our target policy rates as well in these projections. Again, that would be a form of communication.  The range and central tendency of these variables, in lets say the fourth quarter of each year, would give the public information on how we are 
   planning to meet our inflation goal.  I believe this would increase the benefits of stating a numerical goal by making our commitment to that goal more credible. Mr. Chairman, I also recognize the political sensitivities in this matter and certainly am willing to defer to your judgment.  However, I do think that dragging the process out too slowly may have some unintended consequences and perhaps lead us to lose some of the near-term benefits that having a goal might provide us.  If you conclude that we have a window of opportunity here, both politically and practically, I would urge you that we not let this window close on us. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I ultimately favor an inflation target, but I am concerned that this may not be the right time.  Nevertheless, I am open-minded.  First, I do ultimately favor an explicit inflation guideline.  Inflation is a monetary phenomenon.  How the central bank responds to everything around it determines the range of inflation outcomes.  Once inflation fell to a range closer to price stability in the 1990sas we have already mentioned, we had this debate in 1995it seemed reasonable to me as a monetary economist that clarifying our inflation objective would improve the publics expectations and the effectiveness of our policies.  Because trend growth and natural rates of unemployment are determined by technology and the structure of the economy, we cannot similarly dictate their steady-state levels.  We can and do provide information on that in our longer-term forecasts. Despite my preference for an explicit guideline, I worry that now might not be a good time to adopt an explicit target.  I can be convinced otherwise, but I think the dangers might outweigh the likely benefits. I think that many would see such a move as overly opportunistic.  Our intentions may be questioned, and these criticisms could undermine our credibility.  I am not 
  concerned merely about the reaction of political officials who may not understand the value of clear inflation goals.  Earlier this week we hosted a group of academic economists who would normally be very sympathetic to this suggestion. But as the discussion turned to the reported arguments that adopting an inflation target might help us with our current policy dilemmas, there was great resistance, and I was really quite surprised.  Many thought this was taking advantage of a crisis without working to build the necessary political consensus.  Some also thought it would make the Fed look out of touch.  The debate over inflation targeting is not fresh.  As you mentioned earlier, it is a long-standing debate, and it seems somewhat orthogonal to the financial crisis. At a minimum, there is a mountain of effort and persuasion required to pull this off successfully. Now, any reluctance I have about setting an explicit inflation target is due simply 
to the current difficult environment.  If we can overcome thisand, Mr. Chairman, I would rely on your judgment there as well that this has reasonable prospects of being successfulI would favor this proposal. Turning to the other questions circulated to the Committee, I dont see those as generating substantial concerns, at least from my standpoint.  For example, I dont believe that our dual mandate stands in the way of adopting an explicit numerical price objective.  Most of my thinking on this is consistent with quadratic loss function analysis not much different from the Bluebook discussion before each meeting.  The key elements are an output-like gap and an inflation deviation from target.  The policy responses implied by such a loss function have a partial adjustment of inflation toward its target value.  The rate of adjustment will depend on the size of the output gap in obvious ways.  If we adopt an explicit inflation target, we can find straightforward language to communicate how these adjustments respect our dual mandate 
responsibilities, in my opinion.   
  How does this affect the conduct of monetary policy?  Well, the loss function approach indicates that we would balance any conflicts within our dual mandate goals.  This is not that different from the current situation, in which we have implicitly agreed on an inflation range, at least according to our longer-term forecasts.  With regard to financial stability considerations, most of the time it would be enough to say that policy takes into consideration financial market pricing and volatility through the way in which they influence the evolution of the economy and, hence, our dual mandate goals.  Of course, there can be regime-switching or nonlinear financial risks. We are certainly experiencing those.  In those events, we would need to balance more considerations. For me, this issue does not seem any more relevant for the inflation target discussion than our other policy goals. In terms of timing, it is probably useful to adopt the medium-term language and try to define the elastic ways it will be usedthat is, in a state-contingent way.  I would provide an average time frame for medium term, such as three to four years.  I would then use some language based on the loss function framework to indicate that the size of the output gap would tend to influence the actual timing of medium term. Regarding price-level targeting, I am not convinced that it is a better tool for minimizing the costs associated with inflation and deflation, and the temptation for the Committee not to follow through when it is uncomfortable to do so would be large.  That would be a big credibility hit. On the particular numbers, I would favor using the total PCE index at 2 percent.  That seems to be more likely to avoid zero lower bound issues.  I agree with President Plosser.  I think just finding an explicit goal would provide most of the benefits, not so much the number, as long as it is not too large. I would prefer a target around which we behave approximately symmetrically.  I dont want us to panic over deflation every time we move under the target.  Now, my staff has 
 talked to me quite a lot about the fact that optimal policy could imply some asymmetry with respect to inflation being above and below the target.  For example, we might need to be more aggressive fighting below-target inflation, as we are today, because the costs of a moderate deviation in that direction could be higher than those of a comparable deviation above the target.  In that case, the guiding principle is that optimal policy should seek to equalize pain above and below target, not the time spent above and below.  This is a clever idea, but this equilibrium relies heavily on rational expectations and full credibility with the public, and I am just a bit skeptical of that. To conclude, my bottom line is that I like an explicit inflation guideline at the right time.  I am not completely sold that this is the right time, but I am open-minded.  If you have a reasonable expectation or assurance that this could be pulled off, I would favor it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, am in favor of an explicit inflation target, and I think now might be a fairly good time to embark on this.  Echoing your opening comments, I think todays expectations are extremely fluid.  Should they become entrenched, they will dictate inflation over the next five years and may lead us into a particular regime, one that involves a side of the two-sided risk that we faceeither a Japanese-style deflation or a 1970s-style resurgence of a volatile inflation environment.  So I think naming an inflation target now would help a lot to avoid both of those possibilities.  If we can exit the current crisis with inflation at target, we will set up the next long expansion along the lines of the 1990s expansion that increased incomes substantially in the United States.  I think that should be our goal, even though we are in the heart of a financial crisis right now. 
 My reading of the foreign experience is that it has been extremely valuable for countries whose monetary policies were somehow at a crossroadsthey had a lot of problems in the past, often with managing exchange rates, and then they were able to move to inflation targeting and get good results from that.  That hasnt been the case for the United States, but now may be a different time.  You might think that we are at a crossroads right now and that we could lose control of the inflation situation, either on the high side or the low side, during 2009 and therefore we might want to take the step at this moment. Let me talk for just a minute about interference with the dual mandate.  My view on inflation targeting is that this point is the most misunderstood in the public domain and actually also in some places inside the central bank establishment.  The whole point, at least in my view, is that anchoring expectations is part of the optimal policy from the point of view of a typical household in the economy. That is the Woodford analysis of inflation targeting.  You name your inflation target exactly because this is the optimal policy from the utility point of view of a typical household in the economy.  It does not mean that you ignore any part of the equilibrium of the economy. It means that this is the best you can do with monetary policy in terms of shaping an equilibrium, which delivers the most to the median household in the economy.  So if we are able to communicate that and get that across in a public debate, that would go a long way because, really, everyone should be for inflation targeting from that point of view. There is a question here about excessive declines in inflation.  I guess I am maybe more concerned than some of my colleagues on the Committee here, but I do see this as a real risk.  I might mention that five-year TIPS are at minus 35 basis points today.  That is the inflation rate implied by the five-year TIPS.  I know there may be distortions in this market, but that number is making me nervous.  If that actually materializesthat is, we have declines in prices over the 
  next five yearsI think there is no question that we will be in a Japanese-style equilibrium for the foreseeable future. I am very concerned about that possibility, and maybe the inflation target would help us on that. As far as the FOMCs conduct of monetary policy, I dont think actual policy conduct would change that much because I think implicit inflation targeting is going on inside the Committee, and much of the discussion about monetary policy is based on implicit inflation 
targeting. This, to me, is all about communicating to the private sector in a very turbulent time what it is we are trying to do. Also, I dont see any hindrance to our ability to address financial stability issues. In fact, we are addressing financial stability issues right now, and we are saying that, because we can reverse programs later on, the inflationary effect is minimal. I dont have strong opinions on the time frame.  I think it should be a medium-term target. We should be looking at average inflation over several years.  I do think that setting a price-level target might work in some models that depend heavily on rational expectations.  As much as I love those models, I think they may not be ready for prime time as far as actual policy is concerned. So going to a price-level target at this juncture is just too difficult, and it would be difficult to maintain credibility if we went in that direction. As far as a single number or a range, I have always liked a single number.  For me, a range doesnt make any sense.  I think it implies that you have a region of indifference about inflationthat inflation in a certain range is all the sameand I dont think that is what we really think. So I prefer a point for the objective.  As far as which basket, I would prefer the headline CPI. As much as possible you want to get to prices that households actually pay.  That came up all through 2009, when we were emphasizing core inflation and other prices were 
      moving radically. That harms our credibility.  Also, the CPI is not revised later.  Core would still be used as a gauge, but that is not the ultimate objective. For the numerical value of the target, I think inflation is quite distortionary for the economy.  That is my reading of the literature on the topic.  Not least among the many types of distortions that occur is significant interaction with the tax code, which is that the tax code is necessarily imperfectly indexed to inflation. So when you get inflation, you are changing taxes all around. We know that that is distortionary in the economy, and it is an unintended consequence. I would suggest 1.5 percent as the target. One question was whether we should have a higher inflation objective in the medium term, saying that we would come down to a lower level of inflation at some point further in the future. I would really not want to do that.  I think that is playing with fire.  It seems to me that a press release that says something like that might ignite exactly the 1970s-style of inflation, and I wouldnt want to go in that direction.  It seems to me also to be opposite to the general idea of inflation targeting, which is to anchor expectations and to reassure the private sector that you are not going to shift inflation around on them unexpectedly.  I have a few more comments, but in the interest of time, I am going to stop my comments here.  Thank you very much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Also in the interest of time, Ill be brief.  We have said a lot about this subjectit is hard to picture much that hasnt been said.  Yes, I do believe that we should adopt a specific numerical objective for inflation.  We should be clear why and what were doing.  I just cant help but start thinking about this question from the point of view of our taking actions over time in a repeatable process that generates a consistent pattern of behavior.  That point of view leads you to certain answers to some of these questions.  From that point of view, 
         whatever we do and whatever we imagine for that policy rule, surely it generates an average rate of inflation.  So the question before us is, Why not reveal that?  Why not state that?  Why not figure out what that is and state that to people? Now, contrast that with some suggestions and some discussions that seem to have the flavor of lets state now what we think, on a one-shot basis, that inflation is going to be from 2010 to 2015.  I think of this as announcing a consistent pattern of behavior that we think were sticking to.  That approach has a real advantage over the long-term projections approach.  If were going to be doing long-term projections every quarter, I dont see how we avoid the problem weve had with the thiryear-of-the-projection approach to signaling our inflation intentions.  Every quarter that projection could come out differently, and thats going to be an acute problem in the coming months when the composition of the Committee changes, obviously.  How does it relate to our dual mandate?  I agree with Jim.  Its no problem.  Lets imagine that were following a pattern of behavior that we view as optimal with respect to our dual mandate.  Surely that generates an average rate of inflation.  Why not announce that?  If we announce that, it does not have any implications for our pursuit of our dual mandate. The time frame is sort of a separate question, I think.  This is a question for what we say in any given meeting or in any given quarter about how we view the economy evolving over the next couple of yearswhat we view as our outlook.  How we view inflation is likely to come back to what we view as its long-run average, and, gosh, that could change.  It could be quick in some instances; it could be longer in some instances.  I dont see any reason to pin ourselves down to a particular time horizon. How would this change the way the Committee does its work?  Well, I think it would inevitably change how it communicates.  I think wed pay a little more attention to inflation.  In 
    particular, wed tend to underemphasize language that treats inflation as an autonomous development in the economy (which we tend to use too much now), and wed use more often language that implies our responsibility for the path inflation is likely to take. I think we would serve ourselves best by not changing our inflation target very much at all and communicating about it in a way that conveys that we intend to revisit this only very, very rarely.  I do not think this would interfere with our ability to deal with financial stability.  It is hard to picture how allowing uncertainty about our inflation objectives would help with financial stability.  If anything, it seems as though the opposite would be true, especially given the experience in the 1970s.  About these other questions, a single number to me seems obviously preferable.  Total PCE and 1 percent would be my choices.  That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For many years now, I have believed that providing the public with an explicit numerical inflation objective would enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy for a variety of reasons.  One of the principal benefits would be an improvement in communication, thereby enhancing the FOMCs ability to fulfill both of our mandates.  I believe that an explicit numerical inflation objective would help to anchor inflation expectations, and strongly anchored inflation expectations should improve the efficiency of wage- and price-setting decisions and lead to better economic performance.  Although the research findings are not conclusive, I think that foreign central banks operating with explicit numerical objectives have, on balance, more firmly anchored inflation expectations than have other central banks.  Anchoring inflation expectations also could be especially crucial during current economic conditions, but my support for specifying a numerical objective is based on my regard for its value in all circumstances. 
         In principle, establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective need not diminish or assign less weight to our objective for maximum employment.  Rather, establishing a numerical inflation objective should help us achieve our employment goal over the long run.  Because the Committee has already reached a broad consensus on an implicit inflation objective, announcing an explicit inflation objective should not materially change the way we respond to economic conditions. However, an explicit inflation objective may be most valuable in times when achieving it appears to be more difficult.  Right now, as several have mentioned, people are concerned both about the possibilities for future deflation and future inflation.  The existence of an explicit commitment would enable us to explain more clearly to the public what we are trying to accomplish and how we intend to do so.  It would require us to explain how we plan to achieve our objective when we see actual and projected inflation deviating from our objective. I favor an objective expressed in terms of an average over the medium term of, say, three to five years, but the communication value I see is not that tightly connected to a specific time frame.  Evidence of successful inflation targeting should be revealed in a closer alignment of inflation expectations with the inflation objective, particularly in the case of the longer-term horizon.  My preference for a total versus core inflation measure depends on the time frame chosen, but a longer-term target specified in terms of total CPI inflation seems like the best option to me.  I favor the CPI because it is not subject to revision, and many contracts are specified in terms of the CPI. Concerning the issue of an inflation objective versus a price-level objective, I prefer the inflation objective.  I am more persuaded by having at least the experience of some foreign central banks in implementing inflation targets than by purely theoretical arguments for price-level targeting.  I think our objective should be stated in terms of a number with an acceptable range around that number.  While I prefer the CPI, I recognize that the PCE measure has become the focus 
          of our attention, and I have been on record as suggesting an objective for PCE inflation of 1 percent.  But in light of our recent experience, I am now leaning toward an objective for total PCE inflation of 2 percent to provide a larger buffer against zero lower bound events.  I would provide a range around that number of plus or minus 1 percent to let the public know that some variation in actual inflation is acceptable during that time frame.  But, again, the size of that range would depend on the horizon that we select.  Recognizing our dual mandate, I think publishing our longer-term growth and employment projections would remain a valuable part of our communication strategy. So in conclusion, I do regard the establishment of an explicit numerical inflation objective as a natural step forward in our Committees progress toward better communications.  I recognize, however, that gaining support for such a framework at this time could be challenging.  I would feel much better about launching this endeavor if I thought that this step in our communication strategy would be welcomed by the Congress and the Administration rather than resisted, but I will leave managing the politics up to you, Mr. Chairman.  As you said clearly in your opening comments, you are well attuned to the political environment.  I also agree, though, with President Yellen that extending the Committees economic projection horizon buys us a lot of what we are trying to achieve without some of the political risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As a general statement, I think I am on record as having supported and continuing to support an inflation objective.  A numeric inflation objective, as we have talked about before, would help communicate the Federal Reserves commitment to price stability. Of course, that said, we all realize that in the past this Committee was reluctant to push for its implementation in part because such an articulation of price stability mandate needs 
             strong support from the Congress.  In the current circumstances, this support may be likely; but in the longer term, if inflation were to require strong tightening policy, I think support would fade quickly away.  Also, it may be difficult to make the case for quantification of only one of the mandates as we have talked about before, thus making this action, if we were to move toward an explicit target, a temporary action just by circumstance.  I would be opposed to establishing a numerical inflation objective at this time if it were only a temporary measure in response to the current crisis. In my view, if we go this way, we need clear congressional agreement, at least in a resolution, and the mandate should be considered by all parties as permanent.  I see little benefit in adopting a temporary numerical objective.  Such an approach would likely undermine our credibility in establishing a permanent objective at a future date.  If by circumstances or if we think the odds are fairly high that an explicit numeric objective at this time would be temporary, I believe we would be better served by focusing instead on our communication strategy, as President Yellen has outlinedat this time, for example, clearly indicating that inflation below 1 or some percent was unacceptable and would call for aggressive policy action, as we have already taken. In terms of implementation of a permanent numerical objective, though, I would favor a medium-term range of 1 to 3 percent.  I would prefer overall CPI but certainly can live with PCE as we have been doing at this time, with an explicit statement that we are targeting the midpoint of 2 percent.  That makes it a target, and the range gives some maneuvering room, but we are headed always toward 2 percent.  This is as other central banks have done.  I would say I am not in favor of price-level targeting at all, in part because of the difficulty of communicating such an approach to the public in any successful way.  If, however, we are going to decide to go down this road toward inflation targeting or even price targeting, I guess I would back off this idea of longer-term 
   projections just because I think of the added confusion that it would perhaps cause.  I will leave my comments at that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Hoenig.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I have long favored adoption of inflation targeting, and as with the policies to address too big to fail, it appears to me that the time has finally come to go down this path.  I think the arguments in favor of inflation targeting are by now pretty familiar.  I dont view it as a significant departure from the way we conduct policy in normal circumstances.  Obviously, the past 18 months have not been normal circumstances.  So in many ways, I think it is institutionalizing and making explicit things we have typically done in any event.  I do think inflation targeting has the potential on the margin to improve accountability, to address the potential time-inconsistency problem, and to improve communication.  I am struck by the fact that, if we had an explicit inflation target, it would probably help in the current circumstances, where there is, indeed, a good deal of concern both inside the organization and externally about the potential for deflation.  I think it would have also helped six months ago, when there was a good deal of concern that inflation was getting away from us and getting out of hand because of what was happening with commodity prices and so forth.  So I think it would be valuable in all of those regards, but I do not want to oversell it.  I think, as I said, it is largely institutionalizing the way we have conducted policy for several years now under normal circumstances. I will certainly leave to you the political judgment as to how to best proceed and what the timing ought to be.  Let me just make a few other comments here.  As several others have said, Jim and Jeff among them, I do not see any problem on the substantive level with adopting an inflation target and the dual mandate.  In the long run, sustainable growth and price stability go hand in hand, and indeed I think we can explain that.  I would have a mild preference for adopting a range rather 
      than a point estimate just for credibility reasons.  If you adopt a single numerical target, I think people are going to say to themselves, Well, there is either an implicit range around that or their ability to hit that number right on the button is low.  But I do not think that is a show stopper, quite honestly, one way or the other. I do not worry about our ability to respond to financial crises.  I think the central bank always has the flexibility and the responsibility to respond to those situations when appropriate, and even preemptively, if we see something in asset prices that the Committee judges at the time to require a response on our part. I do think an important issue, and one on which personally I would like to see more evidence and more work done, is what the appropriate time horizon is.  Presumably we are going to conduct policy as we have been to achieve our objective of price stability over time.  If the time horizon is too short, you run the risk of excessive volatility in interest rates, assuming thats your instrument but perhaps even if not.  If the time horizon is too long, it is meaningless.  My guess is that we are talking about something like four or five years, but I would like to see more evidence on that particular subject. I do have a preferenceit is not a strong onefor the PCE index only because I think that is a better measure of inflation and the one we ought to be paying attention to.  With regard to the numerical specification, I have long favored something like the European Central Bank target of 2 percent or a little under.  That gives us some room on the downside.  But having been around this Committee for quite a while and observing the great concern with deflation not only in the current circumstances but back earlier this decade when the economy was, in fact, expanding, I think we do need to recognize that and be careful that whatever number or range we pick is not too low.  After all, most of the benefits of selecting and achieving an inflation target come from maintaining 
          inflation at a stable, low level. It probably does not matter very much whether the number is 1, 2, or even 2, as long as it is low and as long as we achieve it.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Evans, I met with my academic advisory council this last week.  It is composed of a variety of academic economists from around Boston. As you might expect, there were widely divergent views on the advisability of inflation targeting and the nature of what it should look like, but I nonetheless think that some of the observations they made were of interest.  First, those who thought that a target was a good idea thought the lower bound of that target should be 2 percent.  Thats higher than they would have advocated previously and certainly higher than many members of the FOMC have advocated.  Second, those who thought a target was a good idea argued for a large range, at least 100 basis points, reflecting the difficulty of actually remaining in our target range and, again, larger than I think many have discussed in the past.  Third, many felt that we would have a difficult time explaining to the public our target because we might have great difficulty hitting that target and it might make the Federal Reserve look ineffectual.  So there was a surprising concern about actually moving toward a target at this time. My own view is that a target may make sense to highlight that we will take actions necessary to avoid deflation and that we will remove the accommodation quickly enough that inflation will not be a significant problem when the economy does eventually recover.  I do have some caveats.  First, as I have mentioned before, this is the second time this decade we have been concerned about a zero lower bound, and it is significantly limiting our actions at this time.  We should take into account the cost of being in this position too often, and I think that argues for a higher target rate than I would have argued for two years ago.  At a minimum, the middle of the 
     range should start with a 2, not a 1.  Second, as we experiment with a target and given the variability we have seen in all inflation measures, we should start with a larger range than I would have argued for a few years ago, probably 100 basis points is reasonable.  Third, just by observing where inflation has actually been over the last decade, it seems as though a revealed preference for inflation ranges has been roughly 1 to 2 percent.  I think an open question is whether our preferences should change based on hitting the lower bound this time. In terms of the other questions, I will just be very brief.  Like others, I think it will be very difficult to have a price-level objective.  I just think it is too difficult to communicate.  It will be a big enough challenge to explain inflation targeting.  So I would not be in favor of moving to a price-level objective.  Second, the Congress may ask that we also provide a target for the unemployment rate if we adopt an explicit inflation target, and we should ask ourselves whether that is a tradeoff we are going to be willing to make.  Finally, regarding communication, most of our communication recently has been on the PCE measure.  I think changing as few things as possible probably makes sense. So I would be an advocate for using the total PCE.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is always desirable to have inflation expectations well anchored and better anchored, and I think the benefits of having more firmly anchored inflation expectations are higher now than they have been at any time I can think of at least in the recent past.  As you remarked, Mr. Chairman, on the one hand we face the threat of prolonged disinflation and weakness with a potential adverse feedback loop with declining inflation expectations raising real rates and feeding economic weakness, which in turn further erodes inflation expectations; on the other hand, we face concerns about the longer-term potential inflationary effects of our large operations to get the credit markets moving.  I do think that being 
           clearer about where we think inflation is going over the long run and where it should go over the long run can contribute to anchoring these expectations and, by anchoring the expectations better, will support meeting the dual mandate, especially in the current situation. We need to be careful not to expect very substantial, huge gains by what we do in terms of anchoring inflation expectations.  Expectations are already well anchored in the United States.  I thought the memo on the international experience was interesting in the sense that you could see this last spring and summer when, in the context of rising oil and commodity prices, longer-term expectations in the United States were anchored no worse and in some cases better than expectations in inflation-targeting economies.  So I do not think we have a big problem right now, but there is a threat of a bigger problem.  If, as seems likely, inflation and output are weak over an extended period, probably the most important question that we will face about expectations and credibility will be whether we can actually get inflation up before many years have passed, not whether we want to raise inflation and output.  Still there are enough studies about reactions to incoming data in inflation-targeting countries and the dispersion of inflation expectations to suggest that there are gains. There will be marginal gains in anchoring inflation expectations if we are more explicit, and as I said, I think that is particularly important in the current situation. I think we should strive to specify an objective in a way that does not materially affect the conduct of policy.  I do not have significant concerns about the way policy has been conducted over the past several decades.  I would not want to sacrifice flexibility or put less emphasis on the output gap. I agree that the better expectations are tied down, the more scope we should have to pay attention to other objectives.  But we need to remember to take advantage of that scope.  I thought policy last spring and summer was appropriate, and the question I have asked myself is whether it would have been harder to ease as much as we did last spring or hold off tightening as inflation rose 
             last summer if we had had an inflation objective. In concept it should have been easier, but I think we need to be carefulif we are more explicitthat we retain our flexibility.  I remind ourselves that the most frequent criticism we get now is that we paid too much attention to the forecast for consumer price inflation in 2003-04, allowing a housing and credit bubble to develop.  I am not convinced that we should lean against the wind of asset bubbles with monetary policy, but we do need to be careful that an inflation objective does not constrain our ability to address financial instability when necessary. There is a whole range of alternatives we could choose to be more explicit about our inflation objective.  The first would be the extended projections that the subcommittee endorsed a couple of months agothe range and central tendency of individual views.  Second would be the Committees voting on a long-run inflation objective:  What are we aiming for over the medium to long run? Where should inflation return to after it deviates from the objective, butcommitment on the horizon?  A third alternative would be one that has what I would call an inflation target that has a medium-term priority and that the Committee expects to achieve within a couple of years. This is what President Plosser was talking about. I think that the extended projections seem like an obvious step, a natural evolution.  They will give us a lot of the advantages.  They will give us reference points for talking about the fact that inflation might be lower than we would like and why we will be acting to make it go higher.  I do think that getting to a vote on the longer-run inflation objectivenot the medium-term inflation target but the longer-run objectiveeventually would have some advantages over just the extended forecast. It is a better sense of commitment and clarity.  It will help in Committee discussion if we are all talking about policy to get to the same objective, and if we are not specific about the time frame, we should have enough flexibility to avoid undue constraints on our behavior. 
       Then how far to go and when to go depend importantly on building the case, as President Evans remarked, both in the public and in the political environment.  We need to convince people that this is consistent with the dual mandate.  So I think the speed with which we move through a potentially staged process would be dependent, Mr. Chairman, on your sense of where the political process is, where it is going, and what the costs and benefits are. On the specific points, I would go for a point rather than a range.  I would go for something around 2 percent on the PCE index.  The range to me has difficult properties about how we would react. If we said around some number, I think we could react very little to small deviations and more to larger deviations, and that makes some sense.  I would make it PCE.  That is what we have been dealing with.  It is a more comprehensive measure.  Even if we moved toward a more explicit inflation objective that the Committee voted on, I would continue with the long-run projections.  I think it is important to emphasize them in our information to the public about what we think the long-run properties of the economy are, and they emphasize the dual mandate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have gotten a lot out of the discussion today. I have to say that I am still really forming my opinion both on some of the more important arguments in favor of this or that and on the details.  But I think what I can best do at this point is just to give you a sense of how I am leaning, which I think is broadly in line with what many of the members have already stated.  I favor an explicit target.  I think going beyond simply the approach of extending the forecast makes sense.  I favor an inflation objective versus a price-level approach.  I think the price-level approach, particularly for the broad public, will be more difficult to communicate. 
          I can see arguments on both sides of a point versus a range.  On balance, I favor a point forecast of 2 percent, a round number.  For many observers of our policy, some range would be understood, and I do like a range from a management point of view because it gives us a better chance of hitting it. But from the point of view of clarity with the general public, I could be convinced that a point, as long as it is a round number, would make sense. I tend to view the approach that I am laying out as really espousing what I call a serious guiding principle, which allows for pragmatic consideration of conditions at any given time and, therefore, does preserve some flexibility, as Governor Kohn emphasized.  Of course, if it is too soft a guiding principle, then it is not taken seriously.  It is not credible.  So I think we want to communicate it so that it is understood that, as a guiding principle, it is to be taken very seriously.  I do not see this in conflict with the dual mandate.  I think we would be communicating a guiding principle for the inflation part of our dual mandate.  I tend to favor a medium-term horizonthree to five years.  I think that is a credible horizon.  I also favor a headline number.  Because we have been using the PCE measure, although it requires a bit more education for at least the broad public, I think headline PCE is a good approach.  But I would certainly be easily convinced to go with headline CPI. To anchor expectations on the part of households, as President Bullard discussed, I think the approach needs to be one of simplicity.  One test that I would use would be to find out if the average informed citizen can recite our policy or our approach back to us.  That is why I favor a round number of 2 percentbecause it is memorable and because I think the average person would get it.  What we are doing here really is formalizing a consensus that already exists.  In that respect I find myself broadly in favor of what most have emphasized.  I do like a staged approach to deal with the politics of the matter.  Under the current circumstances, there is such sensitivity out in the political 
         world that it may require a staged approach.  I agree with the comment made earlier, Mr. Chairman, that you would be in the best position to judge how to stage it.  So as I said earlier, I am still forming my opinion, but those are my leanings at this point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Fisherback from the Galapagos, by the way. MR. FISHER.  Yes, and where you can see how creative destruction works over very prolonged periods, Mr. Chairman.  I recommend it to anybody who would want to truly get away from what we constantly worry about. Mr. Chairman, you have heard a broad range of views, and that broad range of views indicates the difficulty of reaching a decision in short order here.  In terms of my own preferences, from a theoretical standpoint rather than go through each particular aspect, I would basically ask that I be recorded almost point by point as President Plosser early on articulated.  We are in exact agreement from the standpoint of what we might seek to achieve theoretically.  I was taken by President Evanss comments, however, in terms of the validity of ultimately having a price objective, but his concern that now is not a good time.  I was particularly struck by his phrase that this exercise may be orthogonal, as he put it, to the current financial crisis.  The only disagreement I have with President Plosser is that issue of timing, and I would probably say that, unlike President Evans of Chicago, I am not open-minded on the subject.  Let me explain. I do not believe the issue right now is the political environment. We went through this argument before in 2007.  My views are clearly recorded.  I was quite concerned about the politics of this, given my background and given that I am neither an academic nor as intellectually potent as the rest of the people around this table or on this video screen.  I worry about those things.  What I worry about most, though, is the last time we discussed this we were basically fiddling while Rome 
       was beginning to burn, and I worry about the market perception of our focusing on this issue at this time.  Let me be blunt from the standpoint of what we have been able to achieve. We basically are working our way out of a deep end zone, just to use a football analogy.  Charlie will appreciate this since they decimated the Dallas Cowboys.  We have fumbled sometimes, and we have been sacked a few times, but I think we are beginning to build street credibility, and that street credibility comes from the evolution of our understanding of these issues.  As President Lacker and you said earlier in discussing the Bank of America transaction or the new support program, we are learning more as we go on.  I think we have more respect in the marketplace. I think the New York Desk is gainingnot that they did not have credibility before and we have achieved a great deal in terms of these new programs we are undertaking.  We have a financial crisis upon us.  I do not believe that has been alleviated, and I think we are just at the beginning of the game.  We are deep in the end zone.  We are beginning to work our way down the field, and I worry that being viewed as engaging in a theoretical discussion, which has lots of niceties to it and a lot of attraction to it ultimately, may just make it look as though we are not keeping our eye on the ball or keeping to our game plan. So I would argue very strongly from my sense of those with whom I talk in the marketplace that this is not a good time to proceed with this endeavor.  We can think about it.  I think the discussion today has been very thorough.  Again, I line up with President Plosser in terms of what I would ultimately like to do.  I do not have much of a difference of view there.  But I do not think, Mr. Chairman, that this is a good time to proceed from a financial market perspective and the way we are being perceived in the outside world, whatever the validities may be; and I do not think anybody can doubt, certainly on the hawkish side, my credentials on this issue of inflation, even to the point of standing all by myself against a much wiser majority.  I am deeply concerned about the 
           deflationary gearing that we are encountering right now.  But I do not think it is the time to talk about this, and I think we should just keep our eye on the ball of what we have been doing and basically running the business that we are running the way we are running it currently. I want to conclude with just underscoring another comment by President Plosser, which is that words and communication are not enough.  Our actions speak infinitely louder than our words, and right now I think our actions should be devoted to getting ourselves out of the mess we find ourselves in.  I think we are making progress on that front, and I do not want to be distracted from it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Cumming. MS. CUMMING.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe it would be very helpful under the current circumstances to adopt an explicit numerical objective for medium-term inflation of 2 percent for PCE inflation, given the real risk of deflation and the likelihood that deflation fears will become an important part of the publics concerns about the steep global downturn that we are now in.  In some ways, as many have noted, it would be a small step.  The analyst community and much of the public already believe that we have an implicit objective of 1 to 2 percent, and our effective reaction function probably also reflects that.  We could emphasize that continuity with our past practice if we adopt such an objective.  But it is also a large step, as the Chairman himself noted at the start of the discussion.  The implications of such an explicit objective in the current circumstances for our behavior are very important and not necessarily easy to explainfor example, that we would be willing to accept some inflation above our objective for some timeand really requires a carefully crafted speech or even a series of speeches, as well as that political dialogue. I note again that, much as the Chairmans speech earlier this week really laid out what our current monetary strategy is, such a speech or series of speeches could be very useful. 
    What would give that kind of education campaign real power is a unified FOMC behind the speech.  Being unified means a wholehearted endorsement and a consistent message from all of us about the explicit objective, right down to the chosen number.  The normal, healthy debate during benign times can produce great anxiety in stressful times like these, and it would be a large step because, to be effective, this move could not be portrayed as temporary or until the crisis seems to lift.  It would be a real advance in our practice, consistent with where we have been headed to dateothers have noted this in a discussion earlier on this same topicand also where overall central bank practice has been heading.  Of course, it would be correct to evaluate the success of such an objective sometime down the road. I would also like to see us keep it simple for the most effective communication, as many have noted.  So I would see that as a medium-term objective of around 2 percent for the PCE; inflation at a flexible horizon, and here we would be thinking on the longer end of medium, as President Yellen described it, maybe leading into the longer term; and overall inflation, not core.  We do have a lot invested in PCE as what we believe is the right inflation measure, and I would advise continuing.  We would have an opportunity to relate that PCE inflation target to an equivalent in the CPIfor example, a CPI of 2 percent with a PCE inflation target of 2. If we go ahead with long-term projections, which I would recommend, an explicit objective obviates the need for participants long-term forecasts of inflation because in the medium term we would all be working toward and would expect to meet the shared objective.  In such a framework, though, participants views on the long-run values of GDP growth and unemployment would be of great use to the public.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 
          MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will keep my comments short mostly because I do not think my views have changed materially since we last took up this discussion.  On the merits, I remain skeptical of the benefits of establishing an explicit inflation objective, and in terms of timing, I think the timing is really quite poor at this moment.  Part of the reason for the skepticism is that I do not believe an inflation target would have or should have changed our conduct of policy during this period or most other periods that I could envision.  In substance, I think that establishing the objective is of far less consequence than the conduct of policy and the actions of this body.  Our credibility and commitment come from those actionscome from our reaction function to changing circumstancesfar more than from what we say, and I think that is particularly true in times like this. I am convinced that the benefits of an inflation objective are small relative to the prudent steps that we have taken in terms of our longer-run projectionsalong the lines that President Yellen mentionedin keeping expectations well anchored.  I am far less certain, however, that the costs of establishing an objective are small, particularly in a period like this. President Evans talked about this discussion being orthogonal to the financial situation. I think that is quite euphemistic.  Among the questions the world and the markets have about the FOMC, this is not on the top of the list or maybe even on the first page of questions they have about us at this moment. The very nature, role, and responsibilities of the Fed are central and are being asked about in all corners, both in the Congress and in markets, and I think that we should not burden those discussions by adding the discussion of an inflation objective to get some modest benefits thereof in this environment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke. MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say, first, that I have not been thinking about or discussing these topics since 1995.  [Laughter]  Nevertheless, before I got here I could have 
       guessed pretty accurately what the intention of the Committee was and what the targets of the Committee were. From that standpoint, I am not sure that articulating a specific objective is going to do much more to inform the general public as to how this Committee might act.  After hearing the discussion, I could, frankly, support in normal times almost any consensus opinion as to what that target should behow it should be expressed, whether it should be a point or a range, and what measure should be used.  However, these are not normal times, and all of the discussion assumes communication and credibility. On the communication front, I never thought I would see a time when it was almost impossible to articulate the role of capital in the financial system or even the role of the financial system in our overall economy.  So I think this makes it a very difficult time to try to inform the public about something like an inflation target.  The second piece would be credibility.  First of all, we are in a situation with a fairly high level of uncertainty and a low level of confidence in our forecasts, and we are responding to those forecasts with untested tools.  So I think it is really difficult to be precise in what we think the outcomes are going to be.  Second, we have already strained our credibility a bit in our inability to meet the fed funds target for a period of time, and then we moved the target down to where the actuality was.  So I think that those two would make it very difficult right now.  Finally, in the political environment, my concern is that, in our efforts to support the markets and individual firms, we are running very close to the political independence line. Any political capital that we use in that sense is political capital that we need, and I do not think this is a time to use up a lot of political energy on the subject of inflation targeting.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you all very much.  Let me just try to summarize a bit what I heard and make a few additional comments.  We have had this discussion a number of times 
      before, but I actually am learning, and I think the views are evolving, becoming more subtle, and in many ways converging.  So I do find it useful, and I appreciate everybodys willingness to participate in this. I was going to say before the last two or three speakers that I thought we had a pretty broad agreement with the idea in principle.  Now, maybe I cannot quite say that at the end of the round, but it is still the case that purely in principle it seems that the great majority of the Committee is comfortable with the idea of inflation targets.  Again, abstracting for the moment from political and other considerations, the Committee made both the general arguments that we have heard before about anchoring inflation expectations, reducing uncertainty, improving communication, and the like, while noting that there are some special features now including risk of deflation and concerns about inflation that might make a communication device of this type particularly useful. I think there is wide agreement in the Committee that an inflation target is not only consistent with the dual mandate but also supportive of the dual mandate in general and that our policies already approximate inflation targeting in that respect.  Such a change would affect communication more than policy.  For the most part, people agreed this would not affect our ability to address financial stability issues, although Governor Kohn mentioned the asset bubble question.  I think that is an interesting question.  Just speaking parenthetically, when Mark Gertler and I wrote on this in Jackson Hole as academics about ten years ago, I think our message was misunderstood; our message was not so much that bubbles are unimportant but rather that a strong inflation-oriented policy would, as a side effect, be an effective response to bubbles.  But, anyway, there is an interaction, but most people today did not feel that it could not be overcome.  So, again, on general principles, I hear pretty widespread support for the idea. 
         In terms of specifics, there remain some not heartfelt but nevertheless some differences about the details of what an inflation-targeting program would look like.  There remains some disagreement about the PCE versus the CPI.  One place in which there is agreement is that the headline inflation number is the right onecertainly if the range we are looking at is longer than a year or two.  I thought perhaps a slight majority was in favor of a point as opposed to a range, but it was not overwhelming.  For the actual number, I actually expected maybe slightly more interest in moving up from our so-called comfort zones, given our recent experience with deflation risk and zero lower bound. There was a bit of that, but people are still mostly in the 1 to 2 percent range, in general. On the horizon, I think most people are comfortable with the implications of a quadratic objective function model that says basically that the horizon should be somewhat variable depending on initial conditions and preferences, although a couple of people talked about having a more long-run perspective that would be more aspirational and not as constraining in the short term.  There were a couple of interesting comments about having more information about our funds rate expectations, which is something that we have not explicitly talked about much before and that we need to think about over time.  Certainly it is a direction that some central banks have decided to go.  There was not much support for price-level targeting, as being too complex an approach and too hard to communicate. Let me say a word about the projections, particularly in light of the consensus that, if we are going to proceed with a target, we should not do it in a precipitate way.  I think that there was a pretty reasonable consensusand I myself would support itthat we should go ahead with the long-term projections that we discussed and were recommended by the Subcommittee on Communications and that we should think about how we communicate those long-term projections 
      and how that might be either a terminal point for the time being or a further step in the direction of an explicit Committee target.  So I think we ought to go ahead with that.  I heard a lot of appropriate concern about the political process, and I agree with it.  I think it is a very difficult period.  In some ways this could be a propitious time because of concerns about deflation, for example.  Periods in which there are concerns about deflation are periods when there is not, in a congresspersons point of view, a tradeoff between inflation and growth, but rather inflation is in some sense promoting growth. So in some ways it is propitious and opportunistic, as President Evans described it.  But I think fairness to the process and fairness to the fact that we want to have a longer-term decision here suggest that we need to do this very carefully.  I will undertake to test the waters very carefully and with great sensitivity to the reactions that I get both from the Administration and from the Congress. A point that President Plosser made, which I think was a very good one, was that it is not enough to give a target or an objective but that it is important to be very transparent about the linkages between our objectives and the actions that we are talking.  I think this is very important, particularly in the current circumstances, when we are working with such unusual tools and the relationships between our tools and our objectives are much less clear even to us than normal.  So I am very much in favor going forward, whether or not we decide to have an explicit objective, of doing everything we can collectively and individually to provide information and clarity about the tools we are using and how we expect them to affect the economy and what our anticipations are for the future in terms of using those tools, the criteria we will be using, and so on.  I think that transparency in generalif we think about this in a broader frameworkis extraordinarily important right now, and an explicit objective could be part of that.  But even if it is not part of that, creating more certainty for and understanding by the public about what we are doing is unusually important in this context. 
        To summarize, I have heard a very interesting discussion.  It has been very helpful.  I hear for the most part support for the idea of an explicit objective in principle.  However, if we were to move in that direction, there was considerable concern that we do it in such a way that it does not use up too much political capital, create a backlash, or even create concerns that we were off message.  We would have to explain very carefully why this is not an off-message step.  I would propose to continue to discuss and evaluate this option and to do some gentle testing of it with the various political actors and meanwhile to continue with the projections, with transparency efforts, and with our discussion of this within the Committee as we go forward.  So let me just stop there.  We do not have to come to any conclusions today.  I do think it is clear that it is very unlikely that we would take a vote in January, at the next meeting in 10 days, on this matter, but I will continue to report to you on what reactions I get as I test this out a bit. If it is okay, why dont we just turn for a few minutes to the last item on the agenda, which is the meeting structure.  We received a couple of letters on this, which were posted.  We are obviously facing important challenges substantively in terms of finding a set of policies that will address the financial instability and its consequences, and in doing so, we have been very creative and have engaged in a number of unorthodox policies.  Those policies, in turn, have created governance and collaboration issues.  As I discussed at the last meeting, I think fundamentally the only solution for us if we want to, on the one hand, get the right policies and, on the other hand, to work effectively is to do this in a collaborative and mutually respectful way.  As a step toward facilitating that collaboration, I asked the staff to propose a structure of the FOMC meeting, which you received.  Let me just talk about it for a couple of minutes.  I do not know if we want to do a whole go-round, although I am happy to sit here as long as people want to comment, but I would be happy to take comments or questions about it. 
         Although the Board has responsibility for the section 13(3) credit policies, these policies obviously have implications for overall monetary policy, including the effects on the balance sheet, the effects on our dual mandate, and importantly, the exit strategy, which we discussed today as well. So there clearly is an interest of the FOMC to have oversight for and input into the credit policies that are being used by the Federal Reserve. We discussed at the last meeting and I would reiterate why I think that setting a target, say, for the size of the balance sheet or the monetary base, as attractive as that might be in the sense of being similar to setting a federal funds rate target, is probably not a good way to go about it because of the heterogeneity of the programs that we are using and the difficulty of summarizing them in a single number.  An additional point about using a single number is that, given that with many of the facilities we have the usage is determined by demand rather than by supply, it is often the case that when conditions worsen we get more demand.  If we have a fixed target for the base or for the balance sheet, we would perversely be tightening supply in periods just when the facilities are more useful to the markets.  Again, I do not think that setting a target for the base or for the balance sheet is a very good summary statistic, not to mention the fact that many of our programs have variable sizes and, therefore, it is not straightforward that we could even meet such an objective. So how can we set this up in a way to work effectively together?  The memorandum that was circulated discussed a possible structure for the meeting.  Let me go through it very quickly.  First, I proposed to make the meeting a joint FOMCBoard meeting.  The purpose of doing that would be to ensure that there is no barrier to discussing any of the programs, including those that are legally the province of the Board, and to emphasize that this is a collaborative process as we work together on these various policies.  The second element would be that the usual briefing about financial markets and the economy would be expanded to include a regular discussion of our 
      various facilities, their usage, their effects on markets, their implications for the exit strategy and for the balance sheet, and any plans or proposals that might exist for future changes or additional programs so that there would be full information for the full Committee on these programs and our evaluation of their effects.  I propose that, after that and after a Q&A, we have an informal discussion, not necessarily a go-round, just to get a sense of the Committee about various aspects of these programs and their effects on monetary policy.  I think I should reiterateas everyone knows, but I am going to state it againthat many of the components of these programs are, in fact, FOMC responsibilities, including those related to open market operations, to swaps, and to purchases of securities like GSE debt. So to the extent that we want to make changes or discuss possible future programs in those areas, we can do that certainly as a Committee and make decisions at some point during the meeting. With respect to the Boards 13(3) facilities, I think it is entirely appropriate for us to have a full discussion of the implications of those present or future facilities for monetary policy and for the exit strategy.  I think that the Committee ought to express its views on the implications of those programs and that the Board should and will fully take into account those views in whatever actions it decides to take.  Following this discussion there would be the normal economic outlook go-round and the policy go-round, and there would be further opportunities for comments from the FOMC participants.  Then, of course, our discussions and actions would be reflected in the statement and in the minutes.  It was suggestedI think President Lacker suggested itthat another place to have this discussion would be in the policy go-round, and I am perfectly fine with that.  I think the advantage of having some discussion at the beginning of the meeting is to give people a chance to hear what others have to say and to get some sense of the Committee.  Then in the policy go-round, 
           if people have views that they would like to express at that point, that will be informed by an earlier discussion.  So I see no conflict with that. Thats my general recommendation.  I will say just one more word about an alternative.  An alternative would be to have some kind of formal vote, resolution, sense of the Committee about balance sheet programs.  I am open to discussion of any such proposal, but I would just point out that, again, effectively the only programs affecting the balance sheet that are not under the direct control of the FOMC are the 13(3) credit facilities.  At this point going forward, it looks as though we have the TALF and maybe variants of the TALF for the main direction that it is going to go.  So I think it would be really quite effective for the Board to bring such proposals before the Committee and get their input and views, and it would probably be a more straightforward way to manage it.  But I am not wedded to anything.  I really want to make sure that the Committee is comfortable that it is fully exercising its authority and responsibility and that its views are being taken into account as the Board takes any actions related to credit facilities and the like.  Those are just some thoughts, and I guess I would emphasize finally that whatever we do for January is an experiment.  We can see how it works, and we can evolve over time as we gain experience and information.  But let me stop there and just invite any comments or questions on this general topic.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Because I have made the case for balance sheet observation, I just thought I would share a couple of thoughts.  First of all, I appreciate your efforts and your thoughts on this matter.  I think the memo was informative and helpful, and your comments have been very welcome from my perspective.  I would make just one minor suggestion or at least comment.  My view about the balance sheet in terms of the FOMCs role, in part, was not to set or particularly to target the balance sheet or a specific size of the base.  Both in the last meeting and currently, my point has been to think more broadly about putting caps either on sizes of 
      certain programs or on the balance sheet as a whole, recognizing full well, as you pointed out, that some of these programs are demand driven and they go up and they go down perhaps even from week to week in some cases.  I fully understand that, and my thinking along these lines is that we would try to set caps either for the overall balance sheet or maybe even for individual programs, that we would review them periodically and, if demand or circumstances arose where we felt it was appropriate to expand the size of the programs or create new ones and therefore adopt changes in the balance sheet accordingly, we could adapt the interaction between the Committee and the Board in that way. So I dont want to be misunderstood as that I was trying to have a base growth target or even a balance sheet growth target in the way I was thinking about it.  I was trying to recognizeas you pointed out, Mr. Chairmanthat there is an interaction here between the nature of monetary policy and the nature of the credit programs that we are managing.  We need to acknowledge explicitly that interaction and make sure, as these programs and these efforts evolve, that we take into account that interaction in an appropriate way.  That is the critical piece of what I think we need to think about.  Moving forward, I agree with you that we ought to try some new strategies and discussion in our meetings. I hope in the processas you said, it is an experimentwe will work through a collaborative effort to achieve our objectives.  But this does relate backas you pointed out in your commentsto our earlier discussion about inflation targeting and, in any communicative effort, we need to be able to link our actions that we take as a Committee on monetary policy and our charges, relate that to what we are doing and to our objectives in a fairly systematic way.  As you pointed out, and I agree with you, right now that is very difficult to do.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. 
     MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I am comfortable with what you have proposed for the organization and content of the meeting.  As you said, I think we ought to give it a shot in January, and we may learn from that experience that there are some ways to improve it, but I am certainly comfortable in starting with that.  The only other thing I would add is that I have tried to give some thought as to whether we could set some metric or numerical objective for the balance sheet, the base, reserves, or something that would relate in a meaningful way to our objectives and would help address this issue. So far all I can say is that I have been stymied and have not been able to make any progress on how we would do that.  So I think by the nature of the fact that our tools and programs are not, at least on the basis of history, related to our objectives in any systematic way, we are going to have to do this as best we can judgmentally.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I really found this proposal of yours to be very helpful because my views have been evolving on this.  It is much more complicated, difficult, and interesting than even I guessed.  So I think our thinking will evolve on this, and it is an experiment as you mentioned.  I had previously thought that somehow introducing, as President Plosser mentioned, some type of cap on the size of the balance sheet or some range for that would be useful.  But you have certainly convinced me that the size of these programs is going to vary depending on a number of endogenous developments as well as on what we do.  So that is probably not so fruitful. But in terms of the responsibility of this Committee, when we start talking about the exit strategy for winding down the programs and getting our balance sheet back toward where it was at the outset, I recognize that this is quite some time forward and we will be lucky when we get to that point.  We need to be thinking about how the balance sheet looks as we exit this, and that is going to be a real challenge. That is why I applaud all of the suggestions about how we look at these 
         programs with respect to that exit strategy.  What we need to do is think about what the due diligence ought to be as we consider the risk that we are facing for policy.  Depending on how this plays out, there could be capital losses.  I do not know how large, but then as we try to wind this down, we might find that there is a lot more liquidity out there.  Our liabilities are larger.  We cant extinguish that on our own, and that would have price-level implications under certain scenarios that would be very uncomfortable for us.  Now, of course, the Treasury could help us out with issuing certain notes, but then that gets us into how we are tied to the Treasury, and so that is just more complicated. Still I think that your proposalfor Bill Dudley and the New York Desk to talk about financial developments and the programs, being as explicit as possible and in a consistent fashion describing these programs and identifying the key parameters that will help determine whether the exit strategy is going more favorably or if we are at greater riskI think that would be very helpful. When we get to the policy discussion on these programs, we could try to come up with some risk scenarios as benchmarks for things that we fear greatly or things that would go well.  These could be low probability.  Obviously, we are thinking that they are low probability.  The worst case would probably be if inflationary expectations rose and the economy were still in the doldrums or worse.  That is not my outlook, but if there was a loss of confidence in the United States relative to the rest of the worldagain, I see that this is low probabilityhow would that influence what our balance sheet looks like coming out?  Even if it is a low probability, if it has a really high cost to our institution, at least being explicit about the risk that we are accepting as a Committee for the Federal Reserve would serve us very well. I am pretty sure that we are headed in directions like this, but I am just interpreting this now in terms of the due diligence that we might expect if somebody were supervising an institution like this and what they would be asking us to do.  I think that this will probably evolve, and I found this to be very helpful.  Thanks. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks.  I hope the kind of analysis that we can do for the Committee will be complementary with improving our explanation for the public as we develop metrics and criteria.  Governor Duke. MS. DUKE. Mr. Chairman, as we have a number of different programs, all of which have different life cycles, I wonder if we might look at managing our balance sheet in the same way our financial institutions do.  That would be that we would communicate in terms of expectations and in terms of a strategy so that we would have a starting point, which would be wherever our balance sheet was at our meeting.  Then we might also adopt or at least discuss an expectation as to where that balance sheet is headed in the different subcategories.  For instance, in a bank you tend to talk of increasing or decreasing the loan portfolio at various levels.  In some of the programs, it might be an expectation of demand, and in others, it might be a specific decision as to supply.  But rather than discussing each proposal separately, we might actually take a look at the full balance sheet, if you will, and say in an intermeeting period that we would expect our balance sheet to move in this direction in terms of components. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think that is a good suggestion.  But you said intermeeting period, and I think we would probably want to look at longer horizons as well. MS. DUKE. And longer horizons as well.  But it would give some indication as to what we thought was going on with each type of program and the conditions that surrounded it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats a good suggestion.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. MR. FISHER.  Well, very quickly, Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Dukes suggestion is very good, both short and long term.  I just want to thank you for the fairness of what you are suggesting here. I think it goes a long way to being inclusive and certainly to avoid disenfranchising the Committee, which is no ones intention.  Like Gary, Im stymied at trying to 
     figure out a metric.  But I think the important point is that we will at least be having a full-throated discussion of the interactions and the monetary consequences of our initiatives, and I just want to thank you for the proposal that you have made.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just following up a bit on some of these comments, I was wondering if you thought that some kind of metric like the permanent component or the consistent component of the expansion of the balance sheet is really what we are thinking about in a lot of these comments.  Maybe that is the kind of measure that we are trying to put together. A lot of your comments and everybodys comments are that there is much reversibility in many of these programs.  They are temporary programs intended to address the financial crisis, and they will go away once conditions return closer to normal.  But there might be components that are substantial and are harder to reverse, and somehow we would like to get metrics about that so that we have some sense of what we are doing in terms of price-level implications or inflation implications over the medium term.  I do not know if you think something like that is sort of where we are headed, or is that just too difficult to get a handle on? Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think a more accessible way to say what you said was going back to what President Evans said and what Governor Duke said, which is to have forecasts or projections of the balance sheet, perhaps under different scenarios.  That is a way essentially of trying to figure out what the permanent component is or what the longer-maturity component is under different scenarios.  Any other questions or comments?  Again, it has been a long and very fruitful discussion, and I look forward to seeing you in Washington in about 10 days.  Thank you. END OF MEETING 
            
       
_______________    Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 2728, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., 
on Tuesday, January 27, 2009, at 1:30 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 28, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart Mr. Warsh Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open Market Account Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  Attended Wednesdays session only.  Attended portion of the meeting that was a joint session of the Board and the FOMC. 
   
   
  
    
 
    _______________       Attended portion of the meeting that was a joint session of the Board and the FOMC.  Attended portion of the meeting on Tuesday that was a joint session of the Board and the FOMC. Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors 
Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Levin, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Shanks, Associate Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Reeve, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Mr. Sichel, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  
Ms. Dynan, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Kusko, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Gust, Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Messrs. Driscoll and King, Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors 
Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
   Messrs. Fuhrer, Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Dallas, and Cleveland, respectively 
Messrs. Hilton and Krane, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, Messrs. Rasche, Rudebusch, and Sellon, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, New York, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Kansas City, respectively Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
    Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  January 2728, 2009 January 27, 2009Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  Last night Michelle Smith and I attended the swearing in of Tim Geithner by Vice President Biden, with President Obama in attendance. So we now have a new Treasury Secretary.  There will be a dinner tonight after the meeting at which we will honor Tim and say good-bye from this post as he goes into another.  This is a new year and new things, and so this morning the Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced their new PresidentBill Dudley. Congratulations, Bill.  You made it all the way 
across the table. [Laughter, followed by applause]  We welcome you and look forward to working with you in your new capacity. MR. DUDLEY. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As you know, Governor Kroszner resigned in anticipation of the appointment of the new Governor, Dan Tarullo.  But Dan has not yet cleared the Senate, so obviously he wont be attending the meeting, which leaves the Governors here as an embattled few, [laughter] and I think the lowest number of sitting Governors probably in a very long time.  MR. FISHER. Not in quality. 
MR. LACKER. We will go easy on you.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Let me also welcome the new members cycling into the FOMC as voting membersJeff Lacker, Charlie Evans, Dennis Lockhart, and Janet Yellen. The first part of the meeting is the annual organizational part for the FOMC, so we will be just in FOMC mode for the next few minutes.  After we do that business, we will go into a joint BoardFOMC meeting, as earlier I discussed and we talked about this new way of 
     operating. We need to begin with the election of Committee officers.  I need a motion for appointment of the Chairman. MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, it is a pleasure and an honor to recommend Ben Bernanke to be Chairman of this Committee.  I am not sure what sins you committed in an earlier life, but I sure hope you had fun. [Laughter] MR. HOENIG. Its the first nomination Ive heard like that.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is there a second? MS. YELLEN. Second. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you all very much.   MR. KOHN. You need to recognize me again. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I need to recognize you again, Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. All right.  It is a particular pleasure to nominate Bill Dudley as the Vice Chairman of this Committee.  Welcome.  I join you in welcoming him. MR. DUDLEY. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is there a second? 
PARTICIPANT. Second. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you. Now the staff officers of the FOMC. Debbie, would you please read the list? MS. DANKER. For Secretary and Economist, Brian Madigan; Deputy Secretary, Debbie Danker; Assistant Secretaries, Matt Luecke, Dave Skidmore, and Michelle Smith; General 
Counsel, Scott Alvarez; Deputy General Counsel, Tom Baxter; Assistant General Counsel, Rich Ashton; Economists, Nathan Sheets and Dave Stockton; Associate Economists from the Board, 
   Jim Clouse, Tom Connors, Steve Kamin, Larry Slifman, and David Wilcox; and from the Banks, Dave Altig, Dan Sullivan, Joe Tracy, John Weinberg, and John Williams. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. May I have a motion? 
MR. KOHN. So move. 
SEVERAL. Second. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you. The next item on the agenda is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account. Sorry, am I on the wrong item here?  Is that a different order? Okay. Im sorry, I missed an item.  Item 2 is a proposed revision to the program for security of FOMC information.  You received a memo from Scott Alvarez and Debbie Danker.  This appeared to be mostly minor procedural changes to the rules.  The most substantive change was a rule affecting the access to confidential information of people who are not regular employeesi.e., consultants. Are there any questions for Scott or Debbie or any comments?  A motion, please? MR. KOHN. So move. 
PARTICIPANT. Second. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you.  All right. Now we go on to item 3, selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to operate the SOMA.  In a shocking development, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has again expressed willingness to serve in this capacity.  [Laughter] In this context, I would like to take note of a memo that was sent to the Committee by Louise Roseman and the Division of Reserve Bank Operations about their assessment of the controls and procedures related to the SOMA and the management of the various new facilities.  They found that those controls were effective and that the SOMA activities complied with established directives, guidelines, and procedures.  So I think the report we have is that New 
 York is doing a fine job and should continue to carry out this function.  May I have a motion, please? MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Second. Comment?  Without objection.  Thank you. Item 4 is the selection of the manager of the System Open Market Account.  We now have changing leadership in New York, and therefore we are not quite ready to select a permanent manager or to vote.  Prior to the meeting, I appointed Trish Mosser as temporary manager of the Open Market Desk.  We will come back to the Committee for a vote when a permanent position 
is established. Okay. Now that Trish is here, she gets to do some work, I guess.  We have three items 5, 6, and 7: a proposed revision to the authorization for domestic open market operations, a proposed revision to the authorization for foreign-currency operations, and a proposed treatment of the guidelines for the conduct of system open market operations in federal agency issues.  Trish, could you talk about all three of those briefly, please? MS. MOSSER. Certainly. I would be happy to.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The proposed changes were discussed in a memo that went out to the Committee last week as well as in a memo that proposed a slight amendment to the domestic authorization that was circulated yesterday.  Let me start with the foreign-currency area, for which there are three distinct parts to consider. With respect to the authorization for foreign-currency operations, we propose keeping the 2008 authorization mostly unchanged.  We have one modest alteration.  We propose adding 
four additional currencies to the list of permissible foreign exchange purchases and salesthe 
Australian dollar, the Brazilian real, the Korean won, and the New Zealand dollar.  This is being done to reflect the foreign exchange swap agreements that were put in place in 2008 with the 
central banks. On the foreign-currency directive, we are currently recommending no changes.  Regarding the procedural instructions with respect to foreign-currency operations, we are proposing a slight modification to the introductory paragraph, adding the words unless otherwise directed by the Committee, to recognize explicitly that the instructions can be 
superseded by the Committee.  I can pause now for a vote on the foreign side, or I can continue 
on and talk about the rest. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Could you go through all three, please? MS. MOSSER. Sure. I would be happy to.  With respect to the authorization for domestic open market operations, we are proposing several amendments.  The specific changes include, first, minor changes to consolidate language for repo and reverse repo operations into a single paragraph; second, the addition of a new paragraph 2 that codifies the New York Feds authority to transact in agency mortgage-backed securities for the SOMA portfolio using agents, such as asset managers and a custodial bank.  This paragraph also allows the custodial agent to engage in repo transactions in order to manage the cash balances that are generated by agency MBS holdings. Third, we are adding language in the final paragraph, as suggested by a Reserve Bank President, that makes explicit the authority of the SOMA manager, following instructions from the Chairman, to take actions that result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the System Open Market Account.  This authority, however, would be subject to the requirements, set out in the last sentence of the paragraph, that the Chairman consult with the Committee, if feasible.  It would also make clear that any such adjustment shall be made in the context of the Committees discussion and decision at its most recent meeting.  The intended 
effect of the proposed revisions is to place the governance of intermeeting changes by the 
  Chairman in the size and the composition of the SOMA portfolio on the same footing as changes in the degree of pressure on reserve positions and the fed funds rate. Last, in light of the Federal Reserves current program of purchases of agency debt and agency MBS, the staff recommends that the guidelines for agency debt and agency MBS purchases be temporarily suspended.  The status of the guidelines will then be reviewed at next years January FOMC meeting. I should note that there is a precedent for this.  For example, paragraphs 3 through 6 of this document were temporarily suspended by the Committee in August 1999. At the time, the SOMA manager was concerned about the Desks capacity to respond to any Y2K year-end effects and sought the authority to accept agency debt and agency 
MBS collateral. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I would like to comment on the implications of items 5 and 7, in particular for our GSE purchase program.  In late November, as you know, I 
directed the Open Market Desk to begin a program of purchasing MBS and agency debt, based on the authorizations to do that and a consultation by phone that Don and I had with all the members of the FOMC.  At the time, I felt comfortable with that decision.  Since then, given how central the MBS purchase program has become to our policy and given the issues of governance that have been raised and we have all discussed, I now believe that I made a mistake in doing thatI should have consulted more closely and then taken a vote of the FOMC.  So I want to pledge to you that I will not take any similar actions in the future without a formal consultation. Now, the effect of item 5 is essentially to make that part of the rules.  Item 5 puts the substantial changes in the portfolio on the same footing as a change in the federal funds ratei.e., the strong presumption is that this will be done in formal consultation with the Committee and that the Chairman retains the right to make intermeeting adjustments but only in 
 situations where consultation is not feasible.  Again, I believe this is the right direction in which to go, and I support making that change. On item 7, on the guidelines for purchases of agencies, I think this is a useful clarification. I also support this.  But I would like to at least record that, in my own view, I dont think that our MBS purchase program is credit allocation in the sense that this guideline was intended to addressfor several reasons. First, to my mind, credit allocation involves a preference for a certain class of borrowers relative to what normally functioning markets would throw up. In this case, the issue is not an attempt to distort allocations away from some efficient outcome; rather, it is our intention to try to make markets work better and to bring us closer to a normal market outcome.  Second, I view the MBS purchase program as being really very close to monetary policy in spirit and intent in that we are trying to address broad issues of macroeconomic stability by stimulating an important component of aggregate demand.  So we 
are using this particular tool not because we have a preference for housing but because we are trying to stimulate overall aggregate demand.  Indeed, as you know, we are in fact looking at various types of credit in order to achieve that.  I think this is similar to the normal use of monetary policy, which affects different sectors differently, not because we have a preference for one sector or another but because our tools allow us to address different components of aggregate demand with different force. I am saying all of this because I do have this view, and I want to get it out on the table.  Nevertheless, I think it is a clarification and useful for us to formally suspend these guidelines for the time being.  That is my take.  Let me open the floor for comments and questions on any 
of these three items.  President Fisher. 
    MR. FISHER. First, Mr. Chairman, I think this may be the first time that a Wellesley woman has had responsibility for the Trading Desk.  I am married to a Wellesley woman.  I am used to being tutored by a Wellesley woman.  [Laughter] So I have two questions that I would like to ask, just out of ignorance.  The first is about the 65-day rule, particularlyand I may not understand thisbut in paragraph 1(B) and then paragraph 4, the requirement to resell after 65 days or less, does that apply in the case of MBS or not? MS. MOSSER. No. MR. FISHER. Okay. Then the second: Is the limit on $25 billion of an open position in all foreign currencies still current?  Is that appropriate under current circumstances? MS. MOSSER. It is. However, based on a previous vote, we have exempted the fluctuations in the value of foreign portfolios due to changes in the exchange rates.  We do nothing at this point but passively invest both our yen and our euro portfolios.  But given the size of exchange rate movements that we have, it would be possible at some point for us inadvertently to exceed a $25 billion limit.  So we are assuming that we fixed an exchange rate at a time when we were under $25 billion, and we determined that, if we happen to go over inadvertently, it would not be a good idea then to go into the market and actively buy or sell foreign exchange to undo that. So other than that exemption, yes, we are abiding by that, and that is in force right now. MR. FISHER. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I applaud the changes in item 5 to the domestic authorization.  I will note here that it has been a triennial tradition for the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond President to dissent on the foreign-currency-related directives.  I am 
 going to break with tradition and support them. Our opposition in the past had to do with their use and the implications in foreign exchange operations that struck us as off-balance-sheet fiscal policy that was more properly done by the Treasury. However, I would like to share a couple of comments on the Guidelines for the Conduct of System Operations in Federal Agency Issues.  Let me just state at the outset that, in my view, they conflict with what we are doing now with agencies.  Credit allocation is a term of art, and I think there is room for reasonable people, in good faith, to take different positions on what that means, as is the case with terms like normal market functioning as well.  I think of the term in 
this context by comparing purchasing agency securities with some broader-based purchase of a similar quantity.  I think we will have an opportunity to discuss this later in agenda item 8, but that thought experiment leads me to believe that these operations must, compared with a broader-based purchase of Treasuries, lower particular market sectors interest rates relative to others and leave others higher than they otherwise would be.  I recognize that there are membersin fact, the broad majority herewho probably want to continue with the program and not suspend the 
guidelines. If I had my choice, I would not suspend the guidelines; I would suspend the program.  So what I would like to do is respectfully register a negative vote on this.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Certainly. Other questions or comments? All right. If we are ready to vote, then, why dont we do them separately, beginning first with the revision to the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.  Do we have a motion? MR. KOHN. So move. 
               CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there any objections?  Any no votes?  Everybody okay?  I take that as unanimous.  Second, the revision to the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations. I need a motion. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there any objections?  No votes? Hearing none. Third, the proposed treatment of the Guidelines for the Conduct of System 
Operations in Federal Agency Issues.  Given what President Lacker said, why dont we call the roll on this one.  MS. DANKER. Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes 
Governor Duke Yes President Evans Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes 
Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. All right.  That covers the organizational items.  At this point I would like to convene a Board meeting joint with the FOMC.  I need a motion to close the meeting. MR. KOHN. So move.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Thank you.  So now for the rest of today and tomorrow, we will be in joint session.  Lets turn now to our regular Desk reports, starting with Trish, and these reports will include not only our regular financial updates but also the broader discussion of balance sheet issues and so on that we talked about at our videoconference.  Trish. 
                                                         1 The materials used by Ms. Mosser and Mr. Hilton are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). MS. MOSSER.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Spence and I will be referring to the financial conditions and facilities handout in front of you.  Stress in financial markets has eased somewhat in recent weeks, but very unevenly.  Markets directly supported by the Federal Reserve or government actions have seen declines in spreads, 
improved liquidity, and modest increases in trading and lending activity.  But markets beyond the reach of Fed and government programs remain very strained. Moreover, 
the economic and financial downturn is very rapidly depleting banks capital cushions. Let me start with markets in which the Fed has intervened.  Interbank lending spreads, shown in exhibit 1, have continued to narrow.  The sharpest declines in LIBOROIS spreads actually occurred before year-end, and at present, one-week and one-month spreads are below their early September levels.  The declines in spreads 
occurred at the same time that private lending among banks increased modestly 
particularly at the one-week and one-month tenors.  But almost no one is willing to take the risk of lending on an unsecured basis to a bank for more than a month.  As a 
result, LIBOR spreads three months and beyond remain elevated.  As Spence will 
discuss in more detail, declining spreads and increased private-sector lending have been reflected in reduced demand for term liquidity at our facilities.  Similarly, in commercial paper markets, activity is up, and spreads are down.  Rates on all types of A1-rated paper have declinedyou can see this in the second exhibitsince the announcements of the various Fed facilities for commercial paper and money market funds. After year-end, even A2/P2 commercial paper spreads, which are not eligible 
for the CPFF, fell sharply. In exhibit 3, consumer mortgage rates, as well as mortgage and agency spreads have declined notably since the announcement of the Fed purchase programs in November.  In addition, secondary mortgage market spreads to Treasuries fell again 
during the first week of the purchase program in early January.  Retail conforming mortgage rates have increased somewhat from very low levels in early January, moving up with long-term Treasury yields, but they remain well below the levels that 
prevailed before the Feds purchase program was announced.  Spence will be talking in more detail about the MBS purchase program in a few minutes. The FDIC guarantee of financial debt has had an indirect effect on the corporate bond market.  Corporate bond spreads, pictured in exhibit 4, widened throughout the fall, but since December these spreadswhich do not include FDIC guaranteed 
debthave declined. At the same time, the nonguaranteed portion of new issuance, 
seen in exhibit 5, has actually increased; in just the first two weeks of January, it accounted for more than half of new issuance.  Apparently, guaranteed debt is not 
attractive to traditional corporate bond investors, so they have shifted into obligations of nonfinancial issuers. This has effectively increased demand for a small pool of corporate bond issuers, causing spreads to decline. 
    In contrast, markets without Fed or government backstopsuch as consumasset-backed securities, commercial-mortgage-backed securities, and leveraged loanshave shown little or no improvement.  Consumer ABS spreads (exhibit 6) have narrowed a bit since the passing of year-end but remain very elevated despite expectations for the beginning of the TALF program in late February or early March.  Activity is at a standstill, and according to both the packagers and the buyers of securitized products, it is likely to remain so until the TALF is up and running and market participants have a sense that it will work. CMBS and leveraged-loan prices, shown in the next exhibit, seemed to stabilize late last year but recently have fallen even further as the macroeconomic outlook has continued to worsen more sharply than expected.  The outlook for nonagency 
mortgage securities continues to deteriorate. Recently the rating agencies projected even larger losses, which will cause formerly AAA super senior tranches to be downgraded to default-level ratings. All of this is, of course, more bad news for holders of these securitiesincluding banks, insurers, and the GSEswhich are likely to face larger write-downs on mark-to-market assets and significantly larger 
impairment charges.  Recent headlines about capital impairments at several of the Federal Home Loan Banks reflect these ongoing write-downs.  Despite the modest improvements in some markets, one should not underestimate how remarkably fragile financial markets are right now.  The process of deleveraging, 
asset sales, and overall reduction in the risk profile of large financial institutions continues unabatedalthough in a somewhat more orderly way than a couple of months ago. Lack of liquidity is one symptom of this fragility.  Although liquidity has improved since the beginning of the year, for most markets this improvement can be characterized as moving from nonexistent to very poor.  Even core benchmark markets such as Treasuries and foreign exchange have exceptionally strained liquidity.  Volumes are at multiyear lows.  Bid-asked spreads in eurodollar foreign exchange trading (exhibit 8) have more than doubled.  In benchmark Treasury markets, the amount traders will buy or sell at a given pricethe trade quote size shown in exhibit 9is 0.1 of normal.  Volatility has remained correspondingly high 
across nearly all markets, even with the improved conditions in the last few weeks.  High volatility and poor liquidity can be self-reinforcing.  They raise the cost of making and underwriting markets, which leads to less trading, higher spreads, less credit formation, and in general a lot less risk-taking. The lack of liquidity across markets has led to some obvious unexploited profit opportunities. Exhibits 10 and 11 give a couple of examples.  Exhibit 10 shows the 
average error between the yield on 10-year Treasury securities and the predicted yield for those securities based on the Boards model.  In normal market conditions, a host of market participantstrading desks, institutional investors, and hedge fundstrade constantly each day to exploit such large gaps and arbitrage them away.  At present, a combination of balance sheet constraints and high volatility has caused a pullback in this activity, which, again, is self-reinforcing.  Exhibit 11 has a second example of an unexploited profit opportunitynamely, the spread between yields on corporate 
    credit default swaps (CDS) and corporate bonds.  Even in normal market conditions, the corporate CDS market is the more liquid (because it requires less balance sheet and is a more standardized product), but the difference amounts to a few basis points.  Currently the spread between CDS and corporate bonds is more than 200 basis points for liquid investment-grade bonds and nearly 450 basis points for high yield.  Large losses and associated balance sheet constraints of banks and dealers are major reasons for the drying up of liquidity across markets.  But also important is the 
lack of arbitrageursmost notably hedge funds.  Hedge fund losses in the last few 
months have been enormous.  As exhibit 12 shows, 2008 was the worst year on 
record for the hedge fund industry, with losses of 20 to 40 percent for the group.  Almost every type of hedge fund had double-digit losses (except short equity, and 
they were shut out of the market for some time).  Losses were concentrated in the 
second half of the year, with about two-thirds of them in the last quarter.  The poor performance provoked record redemptions, estimated to be at least $150 billion and as much as $400 billion.  Of course, redemptions would have been much larger if manyparticularly largehedge funds had not shut their gates.  In response, hedge funds have deleveraged very quickly, adding more downward pressure to asset prices and further undermining liquidity.  In short, the capacity of the financial system to absorb and mitigate shocks is smallas small as it has been during this crisis.  At present, there are two closely linked risks to the fragile equilibrium in markets.  One, of course, is the continued rapid deterioration in the macroeconomic outlook, both in the United States and globally. The second is the truly precarious financial condition of many of the largest financial institutions, particularly the global banks.  Fourth-quarter bank earnings, which we are in the midst of receiving, were expected to be very bad, and in fact have been even worse for the major U.S. banks, as exhibit 13 shows. Earnings expectations for large European banks are even worse than for U.S. banks. If they disappoint to the same degree, the Q4 losses just for the banks in the table could easily be above $70 billion.  Adding in the hedge fund losses and the large expected losses at the GSEs and insurance companies, Q4 losses in the hundreds of billions seem likely. The outlook for banks is hugely uncertain.  Simply put, investors are worried about the size of the hole in banks balance sheetsthat is, the size of the additional asset write-downs and reserving that will be necessary.  If the hole is large, as anticipated, or worse, enormous, how will banks be able to fill it?  As exhibit 14 shows, banks regulatory capital ratios look fairly robust, but for large banks, the ratio 
of tangible common equity to tangible assetsa metric that investors and rating agencies follow closelylooks much more precarious.  Most important, losses come first out of common equity.  Replacing those losses at current share prices implies 
potentially massive dilution for current shareholders.  As a result, bank equity prices remain under severe pressureas can be seen in exhibits 15, 16, and 17.  To scale just how far bank equity prices have fallen, the market cap of all U.S. banks (including investment banks) is now about the same as the market cap of the soft drink industry. 
         The downward pressure on U.S. and European bank stocks is reinforced by uncertainty about the form and size of government intervention, particularly for the weakest players, which are viewed as closer to insolvency or government assistance.  Even if some investors view banks as having significant long-term value, the possibility of government dilution or even nationalization discourages capital injections from the private sector.  In contrast, government support of banks has capped their credit spreads, which you can see in exhibits 18, 19, and 20.  Although credit tiering is evident in CDS spreads, the level of bank CDS for both U.S. and foreign banks has remained in the high end of the investment-grade range.  Equity holders may expect to be wiped out, but debt holders clearly view the probability of losses as fairly low. Market expectations that large-scale fiscal action will need to be taken in support of the economy and the financial system have had a significant effect on sovereign credit default swap spreads. The CDS spreads in exhibit 21 have risen because the expected fiscal cost has soared and because of uncertainty about the ultimate size of 
the billwhich will depend critically on global economic growth and on the magnitude of government assistance to financial institutions.  Not surprisingly, CDS spreads for small countries with relatively large financial services sectorsuch as the United Kingdom, Spain, and Irelandhave increased proportionally the most.  In recent weeks, movements in sovereign CDS spreads have mirrored movements in the countries bank CDS spreads. Accompanying the increase in sovereign CDS spreads has been a pronounced steepening of yield curves in the major economies.  Exhibit 22 shows that in recent weeks Treasury yields in the United States are up at all maturities, but the increases in longer-term yields are particularly largethe 30-year is up about 40 basis points in the last week and a half or so. Part of this increase is likely due to short-run supply increases. In the next few weeks, $150 billion of new Treasury coupon securities will be auctioned, and this week alone, we are auctioning $200 billion of Treasury bills, 
notes, and bonds. Given illiquid market conditions, we shouldnt be surprised to see a rise in yields that is somewhat exaggerated.  Nonetheless, with large and sustained fiscal deficits on the horizon, somewhat higher borrowing rates are not too surprising. Finally, a few words about monetary policy expectations.  The results of the Desks latest dealer survey are shown in exhibit 23.  Neither the dealers nor the futures markets expect any change in the target fed funds range in the near term.  Dealer economists expect the current fed funds target range to be maintained well into 2010, reflecting widespread views that the combination of a deep recession and continued financial crisis will require easy monetary conditions for some time to 
come.  Spence will now discuss the balance sheet and the use of facilities. MR. HILTON. Thank you, Trish. Assets on the Federal Reserves balance sheet, as of last Friday, totaled $2.04 trillion, as shown in exhibit 24.  The total has declined about $250 billion from its recent peak on December 17, with most of that decline 
         coming since the year-end.  I should note that most of the data in these charts are as of last Friday, and just within the last day there have been some fairly significant developments at some of the facilities.  For example, at the CPFF, borrowing came down as much as $50 billion yesterday and another $21 billion just today, and were 
learning today about large declines in swap facilities that will take effect on this Thursday. But before I get into some discussion of the individual facilities, let me 
give the general picture of what weve been seeing. In general, demand at several of the special liquidity facilities has fallen to one degree or another in recent weeks, reflecting a relaxation of stressful conditions in some of the money markets, as suggested by the downward movement in money 
market yields, which is shown in exhibit 25.  Some of the key term funding rates that are linked to several of our liquidity facilities are shown here.  The direct support offered by various Federal Reserve programs, which since October have provided a large amount of term funding to banks, dealers, and other financial institutionsas well as the support offered by various government initiativeshas been behind much of the easing of conditions in these funding markets and also helps explain why the 
year-end passed fairly uneventfully. Lower rates in these financing markets in turn affect the economic incentives to use some of the facilities, and that is being reflected in the more recent experience.  But other factors, such as an ongoing deleveraging of positions, have also contributed to falling usage in some cases.   Looking ahead, we anticipate that the net size of the balance sheet is likely to continue to fall for a time, but by how much is difficult to say.  Even if reported market rates remain at levels that suggest cheaper funding could now be secured in the market, the liquidity behind those quotes is not always deep.  Any net decline that we see in coming weeks will also likely prove to be temporary.  The agency 
mortgage-backed security and agency debt purchase programs are really just getting under way, and the TALF program starts only later this winter.  Moreover, as we have already experienced, the usage of many of these facilities could change quickly and substantially should conditions in financial markets again deteriorate.   Now Ill tell about some of the recent experiences at individual facilities in more detail. The term securities lending facility (TSLF), which is illustrated in exhibits 26 and 27, does not affect the size of our balance sheet but does alter the composition of assets that must be financed in the marketplace.  TSLF loans outstanding are just 
around $125 billion, and thats off a level of about $200 billion in post-September.  The auctions continue to be undersubscribed, and stop-out rates have regularly been at the minimum bid rates.  Even over the year-end, only a small quantity of the options on loans sold under the TSLF options program were exercised.  The downward trend in participation here is consistent with the narrowing in spreads between the term repo rates on the collateral that we accept and those on the Treasury securities that we lend. In rough order of magnitude, these spreads are now in line with the minimum bid rates at both the schedule 1 and the schedule 2 TSLF auctions.  
Dealers have also indicated that their holdings of some private securities that are eligible under schedule 2 continue to shrink and that money market funds and other 
       investors are now more willing to finance the agency debt and agency MBS that we accept on schedule 1. On that last observation, Ill note that today we let our last outstanding 28-day single-tranche repo mature, bringing to closure the initiative begun last March under which we arranged term repos against agency mortgage-backed securities as collateral.  As recently as one month ago, the outstanding value 
of these operations was still at its peak of $80 billion. Net draws by foreign central banks under our swap agreements have come off a peak of $586 billion in early December, and as of last Friday, they stand $120 billion 
below that, as shown in exhibit 28. Declines in LIBOR and foreign exchange swap funding costs seem to be having a direct effect on participation levels.  Most of the dollars made available by the participating foreign central banks are allocated at a rate of OIS plus 100 basis points, across one-week, one-month, and three-month tenors.  Recently, OIS rates out to three months have been standing at about 20 basis points.  There have been considerable reductions in draws at the shorter maturities, where LIBOR rates are now well below these allocation rates.  Some of the decline in the shorter maturities has been offset by increases in draws at the three-month maturity, 
where three-month LIBOR rates are now very close to the OIS plus 100 basis point 
threshold. But just this morning we learned of an $80 billion decline in net draws on some of the 84-day allotments, about $50 billion at the ECB. Term auction facility loans outstanding have come off their peak level of $450 billion reached over the year-end and now total $416 billion (exhibit 29).  Most of this decline reflects the run-off of some of the special forward-settling operations arranged last November that spanned the year-end.  Although propositions have been below the offered amounts since last October, when the auction sizes were raised to $150 billion, the quantities borrowed remain large, as seen at the last several auctions, including yesterdays 84-day operation (exhibit 30).  Improvement in the term interbank market has not so far translated into a significant decrease in participation at our TAF auctions. That may reflect the fact that the minimum bid rate is set equal to the interest rate paid on excess reserves, which is just 25 basis points, and that most banks have ample collateral available to secure such loans. In line with the more general trends, borrowing at the PCF and the PDCF has been falling as well, as indicated in exhibit 31.  PCF borrowing has been running around $60 billion, and PDCF borrowing has been about $30 billion. The commercial paper funding facility passed a major milestone yesterdayits three-month anniversary.  As shown in exhibit 32, much of the $350 billion of commercial paper purchased through last Friday under the program was acquired in the first days of operations, beginning on October 27.  Since then, increases have continued at a steady but much slower pace. The CPFF purchases only 90-day paper, and reflecting the heavy concentration of purchases at the outset exactly three months ago, $88 billion matured yesterday.  Of yesterdays maturing paper, only $33 billion was replaced with new issuance at the CPFF; the remaining $55 billion of the maturing total was not.  Today another $57 billion was maturing, of which about 
       $20 billion to $25 billion rolled off. This is pretty much what we would expect and what several of the participants in the program had indicated that they would likely do, given that CP rates in the market are now well below the CPFF loan rates.  These rates are set at OIS plus 200 basis points for unsecured paper (100 basis points less for paper with a guarantee) and OIS plus 300 basis points for asset-backed CP.  Issuers that did not roll over their maturing CP at the CPFF covered themselves in one of several ways. Some had pre-funded themselves in the CP market, were funding themselves elsewhere, or had reduced their overall funding need.  Short-term funding markets were able to absorb the increased issuance with no apparent problem yesterday, although some backup in CP rates has been seen in recent days and a large amount of CP issued to the CPFF, about another $130 billion, matures over the coming week or so. The use of two facilities targeted at money market funds reflects the continuing improvement in the position of these funds.  AMLF (ABCP money market mutual fund liquidity facility) loans continue to run off and are now just about $15 billion (exhibit 33). Still there has been no borrowing at the MMIFF (money market investor funding facility).  Inflows into prime money market funds and funds that invest in 
agency paper remain on a steady uptrend (exhibit 34). There have been, however, some areas of growth in the assets on the balance sheet. Purchases of agency MBS, being made through our four investment managers, have continued at a fairly steady daily pace since these operations commenced on 
January 5 (exhibit 35). Cumulative commitments total $58 billion (through January 23). This puts us on a pace to accumulate as much as $500 billion by the end of the 
second quarter. Few of the purchases arranged so far have actually settledso far about $7 billion. This reflects the considerable delays between purchase and settlement that characterize this market.  Of the contracted purchases so far, the vast majority have been for MBS for 30-year maturities, most with coupons ranging from 
4.5 percent to 5.5 percent. The option-adjusted spread to Treasury rates narrowed almost 50 basis points after the announcement of the program in November.  On balance, spreads have tightened somewhat further since purchases began in early January, but there have also been periods of modest backup amid strong selling pressure. Some of the selling pressure reportedly reflects a lack of clarity among market participants about the Feds commitment to this market after the second quarter and the $500 billion purchase objective has been met.  Investors are worried that there may be a cliff, with purchases ending abruptly at the end of the second quarter. This uncertainty could be lessened if, for example, the Committee stated that the program will continue beyond midyear as market conditions warrant.  
Conforming mortgage rates had been about 6 percent just before the program announcement.  Shortly after we began our purchases, they were being posted by the same banks at rates as low as just under 5 percent, but they have more recently moved 
back up closer to 5.5 percent as originators struggle to process the wave of refinancings that has ensued. 
       Working with the investment managers, we have been confronting the challenges of both building up a large portfolio of agency MBS and trying to be supportive of smooth market function.  This has provided some perspective about the potential value of our being sellers at times or of participating in the dollar-roll market, even as part of a strategy oriented toward building and maintaining a large portfolio.  Likewise, the rise in mortgage applications, shown in exhibit 36, indicates that the supply of new agency MBS may increase sharply in coming months, which may be a factor that we need to consider in determining the appropriate pace for MBS purchases going forward. Meanwhile, we have continued to purchase agency coupon securities, arranging about one operation per week. Since purchases began in early December, we have bought a total of $23 billion (exhibit 37). So far at least, most of the narrowing in spreads of agency debt to Treasury securities realized since this initiative was announced in late November has been maintained.  The purchases reportedly have 
contributed to the markets receptive response to the renewal of debt issuance by the agencies this month.   Trish noted the relative lack of improvement in those markets not directly targeted by any of the Federal Reserves newer liquidity facilities.  With that as background, 
let me provide a brief update on the term asset-backed securities loan facility (TALF).  Just as a quick reminder, through the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will lend as much as $200 billion on a nonrecourse basis for up to three years against certain AAA-rated consumer ABS as collateral.  The U.S. Treasury Department will provide $20 billion of credit protection to the New York Fed in connection with the TALF, and further protection will be provided by haircuts on the loans.  In recent weeks, staff members at the New York Fed, the Board, and the Treasury have made significant progress in finalizing several aspects of the program that are critical to its success. These include working out a host of operational details.  The aim is to post the terms and conditions for the facility and to provide frequently asked questions by the end of this week, with the goal of being operational maybe even as soon as late 
February or early March. Ill conclude my review of the financial assets on the balance sheet by noting that we last ran off a small portion of our remaining bill holdings last September and have arranged no outright operations in Treasury securities since then.  We now hold around $475 billion. We have no conventional repo agreements outstanding and have not arranged any such operations in the market since October.  On the liability side of the balance sheet, the offset to net swings in total assets has mostly been in excess reserves, which are now in the neighborhood of $800 billionmaybe now closer to $700 billion. The Treasury had built up its balances held at the Fed under its supplementary financing program to a level of $560 billion in November.  Since then, 
it has been running down these balances because of debt ceiling considerations, and they now total $175 billion. Brian will now continue our presentation. 
      MR. MADIGAN. Thank you. The staff is recommending that the Board and the FOMC act to extend the various liquidity facilities that are scheduled to expire on April 30. The PDCF, the TSLF, the AMLF, the CPFF, the MMIFF, and the temporary reciprocal foreign-currency arrangements are all currently scheduled to expire at the end of April.  As Trish noted, conditions in some financial markets have improved somewhat in recent months, but those improvements have been limited.  With the macroeconomic situation and the condition of financial institutions both deteriorating significantly, the recent improvements would seem to be attributable not to any strengthening of the fundamentals but rather to the range of actions taken by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, the FDIC, the Congress, and foreign central banks and governments to stabilize the financial system as well as to the passage of year-end. As Spence has noted, even though the usage of some facilities has declined, 
amounts outstanding under some programs, such as the CPFF, remain substantial.  
Moreover, the level of usage is by no means an adequate metric for assessing the 
contributions of these programs to stabilizing markets.  In many cases, market 
participants continue to look to the facilities as important backstops for their funding.  In these circumstances, it would seem premature to consider terminating any of the existing liquidity facilities at this time. Although the facilities do not expire for three months, the staff believes that the Board and the FOMC should act now to extend them.  Absent an action to extend the programs, market participants and analysts are likely to speculate increasingly about the Federal Reserves intentions for the facilities, which probably would add unhelpfully to market jitters.  Also, lenders may increasingly become concerned that borrowers will not have access to backup funding facilities to repay currently 
extended loans when those credits mature in a few weeks and hence could become more chary about lending now. The staff recommends that the Board and the FOMC extend the expiring facilities through October 30. This six-month extension from April 30 should be sufficient for now to assure market participants that the lending programs will be available for the period of time relevant for money market transactions.  A case could be made for an even longer extension to take the programs over year-endsay through January 30, 2010but you may be concerned that such a very long extension could signal a view 
that the financial crisis will be quite protracted.  Also, for the programs that depend on the Boards section 13(3) authority, the requirement to find that unusual and exigent circumstances are present may be interpreted as making it difficult to extend 
these programs for a full year from now.  If you do extend the facilities through October, as recommended, you may wish to plan informally on revisiting the expiration dates of these programs around the time of your June or August meeting so 
that you will be able to provide advance notice to market participants about whether or not the programs will be extended beyond October. Some of the Federal Reserves special programsfor example, the TAFdo not have a set expiration date and hence do not need to be extended.  Also, the TALF is not set to expire until year-end.  Thus, under the staff proposal to extend the other 
       expiring facilities through October 30, the TALF would not need to be extended at this time. If the Board and the FOMC act at this meeting to extend the programs, the staff anticipates that the extensions would be announced to the public on Thursday at 10:00 a.m.  Because the swap lines are among the items proposed for extension, part of the press release would be joint with our foreign central bank counterparties.  Draft resolutions for consideration by the Board and the FOMC were included in the staff memo on this matter.  Trish will now continue our presentation. MS. MOSSER. Thank you. I am going to discuss long-term Treasury purchases by the SOMA for a few minutes.  Last week, we circulated a memo outlining four 
options with respect to the long-term Treasury purchase program.  To summarize:  Option 1 is to retain purchases as an option but not to implement at this time; option 2 is to implement a pilot program; option 3 is to implement a large-scale purchase program; and option 4 is to purchase illiquid long-term Treasuries not with the explicit goal of bringing down longer-term yields but to improve Treasury market functioning. In addition, of course, there was an implicit option of announcing that a long-term Treasury purchase program was completely off the table.  The staff recommended option 1retain the program as an option that continues to be evaluated but dont implement at the current time.   The staff demurred from implementing such a program at this time for five reasons. First, for the further expansion of the Federal Reserves balance sheet that would be needed, this program was viewed as likely to be less effective dollar for dollar in easing financial conditions than programs more directly linked to credit formation and to markets with more impaired liquidity.  Second, it was unclear how big such a program would need to be to push down yields significantly from their 
current quite low levels. A large program might not do much at these levels.  In that case, the program would be an especially inefficient use of balance sheet capacity.  
Third, such a program could potentially distort the relationship between Treasury and private-sector yields, affecting Treasury yields while having little effect on private rates. This could potentially undermine the value of Treasuries as a hedging vehicle.  Fourth, such a program might even have adverse effects.  In particular, some commentators would almost certainly argue that such purchases amounted simply to monetizing the federal deficit.  Although it is difficult to assess what effect such arguments would have on financial markets, worries on this score could conceivably lead to higher risk premiums, which could undermine the programs effectiveness.  
Fifth, the program would increase the interest rate risk inherent in the Federal Reserves balance sheet because the long-term Treasuries would be funded by excess reservesan overnight obligation. This means that, if short-term rates rose in the future, the Feds net interest margin could be squeezed, potentially generating losses for taxpayers. The staff does recommend, however, keeping the program alive as an option.  After all, some of the decline in Treasury yields since early December may be due to 
        expectations of such a program in the future.  If the Committee endorses the staffs recommendation, to retain it as an option but not implement it at this time, will longterm Treasury yields rise significantlysay more than 10 or 20 basis points? That does not seem likely. First, most market participants, even those that believe the FOMC will purchase long-term Treasuries eventually, do not anticipate that the Federal Reserve will necessarily begin purchases right away.  They generally believe that, with Treasury yields as low as they are currently, there is no need to commence such a purchase program immediately.  Second, market participants are placing a probability of only about 50 percent that such a program will be implemented at all.  Thats based on our latest primary dealer survey.  If the program is kept on the shelf and remains a part of the tool kit and that is clearly communicated to the market via the FOMC statement, we would anticipate that this would generate at most only a modest backup in Treasury yields. Finally, the note distributed last week also contained some observations about some of the other options for moving ahead with purchases at this point and discussed some of the execution issues raised by the purchase program.  Ill now turn to Nathan, who will continue our presentation. MR. SHEETS. Thank you. Given ongoing stresses in the global financial system and the vulnerability of some key U.S. institutions to foreign-currency funding pressures, the staff has begun to assess the pros and cons of establishing temporary liquidity swap lines that would allow the Federal Reserve to lend euro, yen, sterling, and Swiss francs to U.S. institutions. These lines would be the mirror image of our existing swap lines and would allow the Federal Reserve to respond to eventualities ranging from a foreign-currency liquidity squeeze faced by a single U.S. bank all the way to a systemic shortage of foreign-currency funding among U.S. institutions.  We 
raise this issue in todays meeting in the spirit of bringing to your attention an issue that we see emerging on the horizon.  That said, we are still sorting through and evaluating a number of considerations that bear on this initiative, and we would very much appreciate your thoughts and guidance. One major money center bank has recently shown particular vulnerability to foreign-currency funding pressure. This institutions huge presence in foreign markets is reliant on secured and unsecured foreign-currency funding.  The vulnerability of its foreign deposit base and limited foreign-currency collateral has been apparent on a number of occasions over the past several months.  Indeed, just last Monday, when U.S. markets were closed, our bank supervisors had significant concerns regarding the institutions ability to access sufficient foreign-currency funding. There were similar worries during a particularly stressful period in November.  In each instance, the necessary financing was obtained, but the situation nevertheless remains fragile.  While this one institution is a focus of concern at present, we cannot rule out scenarios in which other large U.S. institutions also run into trouble meeting their foreign-currency funding needs.  There is a related risk that, once one U.S. institution showed pronounced vulnerability in this regard, other U.S. institutions might also then be viewed as vulnerable and that a broader foreign-currency liquidity crunch could develop. 
   These observations suggest that it would be prudent for the Federal Reserve to have the capacity to backstop the foreign-currency funding needs of U.S. institutions.  Establishing temporary swap lines with foreign central banks strikes us as a straightforward way to achieve this objective. Such swap lines would ensure that the Federal Reserve could serve as a lender of last resort in foreign currencies for U.S. institutions. In particular, these lines would offer a reliable vehicle for providing foreign-currency funding to U.S. banks during times when U.S. markets were closed because of either time zone differences or U.S. holidays.  Our expectation is that these new swap lines would be signed and implemented only if funding conditions 
clearly warranted. We do not recommend putting them in place on a precautionary 
basis, largely because we are not certain how the markets would receive the 
announcement of such facilities.  Rather, the features of these lines could be negotiated with our central bank counterparties, with the draft agreements then put on the shelf to be approved and executed as needed. To ensure that these lines could be rapidly implemented in deteriorating conditions, we recommend that the FOMC consider delegating authority to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee to conclude such arrangements.  There might still be 
some announcement effect created by the reporting of such a vote in the FOMC minutes, but it would probably not be seen as signaling the same urgency as an announcement that the facilities themselves had been established.  The authority granted to the subcommittee in this regard would be symmetric to that already delegated to the subcommittee to negotiate swap arrangements to allow major foreign 
central banks to lend dollars. Three further issues are worth mentioning briefly.  First, the legal structure of our existing swap lines requires the Federal Reserve to deposit the foreign currency it 
receives as part of the swap in an account at the foreign central bank.  These new swap lines would be symmetric to our existing lines, but they would allow the Federal Reserve to lend the foreign currency to U.S. financial institutions and require foreign central banks to deposit the dollars they receive at the Federal Reserve.  In principle, our existing swap arrangements could be amended to allow us to lend foreign currency. But we would prefer implementing these new swap lines through a separate and parallel set of agreements in order to reduce similarities to the old-style swap lines that were used to fund foreign exchange intervention in previous decades.  Second, there are other means that could, in principle, be used to get foreign-currency funding to U.S. institutions under stress. One alternative would be striking agreements with foreign central banks for them to lend against high-quality dollar 
collateral. But central banks have been working on these procedures for some time, and although progress has been made, not enough of these arrangements are in place 
to address the existing vulnerabilities.  In addition, foreign central banks may be hesitant to lend to a troubled U.S. institution during a period of stress, particularly on the basis of collateral held outside their jurisdictions.  As another approach, we could simply require U.S. institutions to sell their dollar collateral and obtain foreign currency themselves in the foreign exchange spot or forward market.  However, this might be difficult or disruptive during periods of market stress and would leave 
    institutions vulnerable during times when foreign markets are open and U.S. markets are closed. Third, the provision of foreign-currency denominated liquidity to the foreign branch of a U.S. depository institution would rely on the discount window authority of the Reserve Banks, and some technical issues would need to be worked through in implementing a lending arrangement along these lines.   The staff is not proposing that you vote today to establish these new swap arrangements, but we are highlighting this as an issue meriting your attention.  Wealso note that, if stresses in foreign-currency funding conditions persist, we may be back to youperhaps very soon (and perhaps even in the middle of the night)
[laughter] with a request to move forward with these arrangements and the corresponding delegation to the subcommittee.  Thank you. That concludes our 
presentation, and we are very happy to take your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. That was very informative and a lot to digest as well. Let me just remind the Committee that the only action item in the list, other than the ratification of domestic open market operations, is the proposal to extend the programs.  The discussions of Treasury purchases and foreign-currency swaps are just for information at this point. We will have an opportunity in a few minutes to have a discussion on these issues, but before we do that, let me first see if there are any questions for our colleagues.  Any questions for Trish or her colleagues? President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. So the TALF is scheduled to end in January, but all the other programs with this vote will be scheduled to end in October, is that right? MR. MADIGAN. The TALFDecember 31.   MR. ROSENGREN. Year-end? MR. MADIGAN. Yes, and for the other ones that have a maturity date, the extension would be through October 30. MR. ROSENGREN. It seems a little peculiar to have different dates.  It seems particularly peculiar to have it end at the end of the year when that is likely to be a problematic 
time, regardless of whether things settle down.  So, actually, I would have a preference to go to 
 January. But if we are not going to go to January, I do think that we should discuss it at the June meeting, not the August meeting, because I know that there has been some uncertainty in the markets about which programs would be extended.  I dont think the speculation has been particularly healthy, so it is better to have a little more clarity.  It might be worthwhile, if we are going to have it end in October, actually to include that it would be discussed in June so that people know that it will come up again. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There is a tradeoff between giving people the assurance of a long period, and flexibilitynot committing our balance sheet for an extended period. But I agree with you that, if we do this, we ought to revisit it earlier rather than close to the date. MR. ROSENGREN. Yes. The August meeting seems a little late, given that there is likely to be speculation about year-end by August. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Is it too early to ask for a few more details on the swap description that you were talking about?  In the following sensethere was nothing distributed on this, right? MR. SHEETS. Correct. 
MR. EVANS. Okay. Because the question that I asked before about the swapsand I had been comforted by the answeris what our loss exposure is when we provide swaps to foreign central banks. They stand behind them, so that is about as good as we have.  This is sounding a little different. If I understood what you were talking about, it is that we will be using them as an agent to provide funding to our troubled institutions, and some discussion about what guarantees and whatnot would be very helpful. 
    MR. SHEETS. The risk profile would be different for exactly the reason you suggest.  A lot of the analysis on this particular proposal has been done just over the past few days, and that is one reason that we are not presenting it with a fuller description and more detail.  But we certainly intend to continue to do that work, and as we make progress on some of these issues, we certainly plan to circulate a memo to the Committee describing some of the other issues.  MR. EVANS. Is it too early to have some idea what the order of magnitude of the funding requirements might look like? MR. SHEETS. We havent thought systematically about that issue.  I mean, I could guess MR. EVANS. I wouldnt hold you to it, if you are willing to.  MR. SHEETS. But I think it would probably be better not to guess.  Maybe Trish wants to guess. [Laughter] MR. EVANS. I have noticed that the astute responders dont go for that line.  [Laughter] MS. MOSSER. Potentially fairly largeparticularly if we are considering more than one large institution. In the scenario that Nathan laid out, which is the risk that we are considering, we think it is somewhat less likely that we would use these lines for the sort of operations that most of our foreign central bank counterparties are using to distribute dollars, which are operations and tenders that are open to all. We dont see that kind of need across a broad group of institutions and a broad group of banks around the United States.  But there is certainly a subset of institutions, many of them quite large with very sizable foreign exchange funding, that fund themselves in Asia, Europe, and South America.  Should those institutions end up being in worse financial shape, many of them actually have quite substantial collateral with us at the discount windows in the various Districts. But they would not need funding in dollars.  They 
   would want to come to us instead and, for example, take out a discount loanthey could do it through other mechanismsin a foreign currency rather than in dollars.  The way that we would then finance itgiven the relatively modest size of our foreign exchange reserves and the fact that the reserves are only in two currencieswould be to establish swap lines and fund them that way. MR. EVANS. Okay. Thank you. That is very helpful. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, did you have an intervention? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, just a very brief one to reinforce Nathans point. We began discussions with the foreign central banks literally last week on this issue, and it was really begun because of the vulnerability that we felt on Martin Luther Kings Birthday with our 
being closed and what would happen in that environmenthow we could get liquidity to a U.S. bank that might have difficulties abroad.  In terms of President Evanss questions about risk, this is really no different from our lending domestically to a domestic institution against collateral that we hold, except that we are basically using that collateral to fund the foreign exchange swap.  So you can just think of it as equivalent to our lending to a domestic institution against the collateral they hold here in the United States. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, do you have an intervention? 
MR. LACKER. You may have mentioned this, but who bears the foreign exchange risk in this? MR. SHEETS. Maybe Vice Chairman Dudley and Trish have some thoughts on this.  MS. MOSSER. The way that we structure the foreign exchange swaps now is at a fixed exchange rate for both the front and the back leg, so that we dont have 
MR. LACKER. Right. So the other central bank bears it.  So in this case, who would bear it? MS. MOSSER. We would basically get back the dollars that we gave to them. MR. LACKER. So we would bear the foreign exchange risk of the swap. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Details have not been addressed. MR. SHEETS. There is a new dimension to think throughthat is, who is bearing the foreign exchange risk vis--vis our central bank counterparty?  And I dont think the terms there are going to be different. But then, when we go on to lend that foreign exchange to our commercial bank, there is a new dimension in thinking about foreign exchange risk. MR. LOCKHART. That is a credit risk. That is not a foreign exchange risk. MR. SHEETS. Well, it depends on which currency it is being booked in. MR. LACKER. Wait, wait, wait.  When you say it would be the same, it depends on whose point of view it is. The way Trish described it, we would bear the foreign exchange risk vis--vis the other central banks.  Is that what you are saying? MR. SHEETS. We are still thinking through that point. MS. MOSSER. That is the part that is still being worked out.  I am sorryI misunderstood your question.  We would bear, for example, through the discount window the risk of lending in yen and euro.  Obviously, the collateral would be in dollars, and the foreign exchange risk would be MR. LACKER. Obviously, it is a lending risk.  But before you do the loan, you swap with the foreign central bank. The way we do it now, the foreign central bank bears the currency risk, and in this one, we would. 
      MR. SHEETS. Thats right. The way that works is, when we do that swap, we agree to unwind that swap at the exchange rate that prevailed at the time the swap was made.  My preference in these negotiations is that, for these other swaps, we would do exactly the same thing vis--vis our foreign central bank counterparties. MR. LACKER. To make them bear it? 
MR. SHEETS. So they would still be bearing the foreign exchange risk.  But in some sense we are promising that we get back the dollars we put in and they get back the foreign currency they put in. Right? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It is risk in that the currency is going to be worth less in dollars, but it is not risk in that you are getting back anything different than what you actually extended. MR. SHEETS. Yes, that is right. In some sense, the Federal Reserve and they dont really care because they get back their currency and we get back our currency. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Theres an element of hedging here.  President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Well, actually, President Evans asked one of the questions that I was going to ask. Mine is a lot more generic, of Trish:  To what degree do you sense that this credit default swap market is helping or hindering efficient markets and the equilibration of these distortions that we are seeing? Because there is some debate about this.  I am talking about the speculative CDS positions. MS. MOSSER. My view is that the credit default swap market has taken a lot of abuse for many things that would have happened even if it didnt exist. MR. FISHER. So is it exacerbating? 
 MS. MOSSER. There have been a few times, certainly, that the peculiarities of the structure of the CDS market have led to more-volatile changes in spreads from one day to the next. But, quite honestly, it is a more liquid market.  It probably gives you a truer price signal for the vast majority of credits out there, particularly large corporations, both financial and nonfinancial, than the corporate bond market does.  When market liquidity goes away and it is harder to discern fundamental movements in asset prices, the less liquid marketand that is definitely corporate bondsgives you the worst signal, and the CDS market probably gives you a better signal. Given the size of the CDS market, the rapidity with which it grew, the size to which it grew, and the fact that it is a little the dog that didnt bark and that there were certainly problems with the Lehman bankruptcy and a lot of technical issues, my view is that, frankly, it has been one of the markets that has continued to functionnot wonderfully, but it still functionsand some liquidity is still there.  Others may have a slightly different view, but that has been our experience. MR. FISHER. That actually is the basis of my question.  The point is whether we are getting good information from the CDS spreads, not a distorted version. MS. MOSSER. I think they are probably less distortedcertainly in the case of corporates. MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, since we are beginning the year, a broad appeal to speak to the furthest person in the room rather than to the person next to you.  [Laughter] It is very hard to follow many of these answers because I cant hear you down at this 
   end of the table, and I can imagine our colleagues here in the back of the room have no idea what is being discussed. A couple of questions. It is probably a little premature to be thinking in this detail, but the institution that Nathan described I think we can all guess because of their foreign operations.  They have funding needs in many, many currencies.  Charlie, can you hear me at the end of the table? [Laughter] MR. EVANS. I can. I was just trying to guess whom you were talking about.  MR. LOCKHART. Would we be using hard currency swap facilities to deal with softer currency funding problems when the crisis could begin in a minor currency? Is there that kind of linkage conceivably in how we structure and address this?  That is the first question.  The second question is, If this is an institution for which we have already had an intervention with a significant and very public amount of money involved, would we be offsetting this against that intervention facility, or is this incremental? MR. SHEETS. On the first question, you are absolutely correct that this particular institution does have significant foreign-currency funding needs in some of the minor Asian currencies, for example, and has experienced stresses in those.  I think that is an issue that we would need to ponder as to how to proceed on, and it was in the back of my mind in the sense that in our presentation we emphasized euro, yen, sterling, and Swiss francs.  Suppose it is a minor Asian currency.  Would we want to think about swap lines with some minor central bank to allow them to have that currency, or is getting them yen enough?  Given market differences, time zones, and everything else, is getting them yen going to be sufficient to be able to provide the funding in some of the other Asian currencies? Those are issues that we are going to have to 
spend a fair amount of time thinking hard about.  I think maybe the second question is more for New York. MS. MOSSER. I dont think we are nearly far enough along in this process, nor have we spoken in sufficient detail to either our bank supervisory or our discount window colleagues to make that judgment, frankly.  At this point, the fact that I know is that quite a significant amount of collateral is posted within the Federal Reserve System at the discount window that is not currently being borrowed against.  That is, honestly, probably as much as we can say at this stage. But, clearly, that would be a set of conversations we would have to have. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  If not, we can go to a Committee discussion. We are going to have two more go-rounds in which everybody gets to state their views, so I was hoping that instead of a go-round we could have a more interactive, unstructured discussion of the issues that have been raised by the presentations.  If you allow me, I would like to start by just posting you on a few items and making a few comments, and then we will open the floor for discussion. I think it is important to understand that the calls on our balance sheet and our programs will be very much conditioned by the decisions being made in the Administration and the Congress about the kinds of support they are intending to provide and the approach they are going to take. As you know, Tim Geithner, who was sworn in just yesterday, is overseeing the work with the remainder of the TARP and perhaps an expansion of the TARP, depending on how things go. Staff members at the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks have been working very extensively on programs with our fellow bank regulators and have provided a great deal of support and information to the Treasury as they have been trying to think about how to go about stabilizing the banking system. 
  It seems clear at this point that any solution they are going to come up with is going to have at least two components.  One would be the removal of bad assets in some way from the balance sheets of the banks. For that purpose, there has been discussion, as you know, of an aggregator bank, ring-fencing, or some kind of insurance program that would allow banks to purchase insurance against tail risk for their assets.  The second component that is almost certain to be involved would be capital.  But there are a lot of open issues:  What is the appropriate instrument, what control rights would be associated with it, should the capital be put in just in time or should it be put in preemptively to make sure that there is coverage for subsequent losses, and what would be the ultimate cost?  In particular, will the remaining monies in the TARP be sufficient? I think the smart money is betting no.  In addition, the Treasury is working on the foreclosure programs, which will probably involve up to $50 billion to $100 billion of the TARP, and is looking to support credit markets.  I assume that the TALF would be part of that program. I have had a few very preliminary discussions with Tim Geithner about the consequences for these programs, for the Federal Reserve, and tried to talk about our priorities and our concerns. I think it is a bit strong to say that I am looking for a new FedTreasury accord here, but maybe not that strong.  This is a good opportunity, the next couple of months, as planning is done and as the Administration goes to the Congress and makes requests, to try to clarify as 
much as possible what role the Fed is expected to play.  In particular, I think we should be as allergic as possible to (a) long-term commitments of our balance sheet because of the difficulty of unwinding and (b) credit risk. Those are the two things that concern us.  For example, if we do an aggregator bank, it would be important to make sure that it is financed not by long-term Federal Reserve liquidity but by, as one option, private financing guaranteed by the FDIC, although I think the Fed should be open to doing short-term collateralized lending, as it would 
   for any bank, as part of that process.  Likewise, if ring-fencing becomes part of the plan, I would defend our actions with respect to two large banks, where we have taken tail risk positions as being necessary for financial stability.  But going forward, I hope that we will find solutions that dont involve that kind of glitchy approach. I think that the top priority is to try to get the bank resolution program done in a way that is consistent with good practices on our part. I have a couple of other requests for Tim, and I should just emphasize this is very, very preliminary.  I have no commitments.  Ideally, one would be that, if the government at some point does develop a resolution trust company or an aggregator bank, they should consider, for example, taking off our balance sheet some of the assets that we have acquired at our Maiden Lane facilities.  Second, an important issue for us would be the management of the exit strategy.  The Treasury has already requested from us some memorandums on the supplementary financing bills and on the Fed bills idea, and I believe that 
they will give serious consideration as to how they can assist us in the exit. The lowest priority for me at this point would be the TALF-like approach, for two reasons at least. One is that it is an effective approach that will not happen unless the Fed is involved, because of the TARP scoring methodthe fact that the TARP is scored in terms of the full amount that is lent or purchased rather than in terms of some measure of credit risk.  Therefore, it is extremely unlikely that the Congress would give any kind of authorization that would allow for the TALF to continue, absent some kind of Fed cooperation.  I would also argue that the TALF is much closer to conventional central bank activity than some of the other things that we are concerned abouti.e., it is given the capital support from the Treasury, it is protected from credit risk, and it is mostly short-term lending.  For those reasons, I would put that as lowest priority. Obviously, I think that, as much as possible, we need to cooperate and work 
  with the Treasury to try to get the banking system and the economy stabilized.  But this is an opportunity, and I will do what I can to try to get assurances from the Treasury about how things will evolve in the future. In my view, the main constraint will be certainly not the goodwill of the Treasury or of the Administration but rather the constraints that they face in dealing with the Congress.  As you know, the TARP and the bank stabilization programs are extremely unpopular.  It is going to take a certain amount of political capital to get additional resources.  Therefore, they are going to have to dole out their political capital in a quite sparing way.  But I will continue to work on these issues, and I understand that they are important to the Committee. I support the extension of the programs to October.  We did discuss going over year-end.  The tradeoff is the commitment to a longer outstanding funding, but I do think that we ought to revisit that in a timely way.  On Treasury purchases, I would like to reiterate what Trish said.  I think that there is good reason to keep this on the table, that it is not really a good idea to throw away this option at this point, but that it is probably not an efficient way to use those balance sheet capacities at this juncture.  So I would agree with the recommendation of the staff on that, and I think part of our discussion certainly tomorrow in the policy round would be exactly how to express that in our statement language. Just a couple of other comments. First, one of the issues, which you can see in the press commentarymurky new territory, unknown, uncharted waters, et cetera, et ceterais that, clearly, for us to be successful with our current set of policies, it is important for us to be as open and transparent as possible and to provide as much information as possible.  I want you to know that we have here at the Board, in cooperation with the Reserve Banks, a new transparency initiative which has at least two parts, maybe three.  One is that Governor Kohn has consented to 
   head a committee that is going to review all of the information associated with our balance sheet, the programs, collateral, and all of those things and ask the question, for information that we do not release, whether we have a good, strong policy justification for not releasing it.  If not, then we should be as forthcoming as possible about providing the public with information about the collateral, about the programs, and so on.  So that is ongoing.  I will have a hearing on February 10, when I will discuss these issues in front of Barney Franks committee, and I have a speech at the National Press Club the week after that, when I will address the press and let them ask 
questions about these issues. The other part of the transparency initiative is to try to make our programs more accessible to the general public, including the media, congressional staffers, and the like.  We have an effort under way to develop a website, essentially, that will link to all of the information 
that we have and that will provide overall discussion and education about our various programs, which we hope to get going within a month at the latest.  I think the educational aspect of this is very important in trying to get people more comfortable with the regime that we are operating in, given the constraint on the federal funds rate. Finally, going along with our discussion about extending the various facilities, I should tell you that, using the authority vested in me, I extended the TAFthe auction facilityuntil 
the end of the quarter at the current level of $150 billion.  So that particular item goes to the end of March. But that is an authority, as I understand it, that we can use here at the Board.  Okay. I have taken a good bit of time.  Let me stop and turn to President Lacker for comment or discussion on the issues of the balance sheet. MR. LACKER. Thank you. Im happy to kick off our first go-round in this format.  Obviously, we established a new interest rate regime at the last meeting and have some knotty 
 issuesa lot of challengesahead of us.  I want to borrow a bit of time from my remarks later in the meeting and use them here, if I could.  I respect your appeal for disorganized interaction, but I have organized my thoughts.  [Laughter] I am happy to give a disorganized version, if you would like, but PARTICIPANT. How do we tell?  [Laughter] MR. LACKER. Good question. There is an observational equivalence here, I am sure.  First, let me applaud the discussions you have initiated with the Treasury.  I want to comment a bit on that. I think they are very important right now.  What I would like to talk a bit about, first, is just the two schools of thought that we have been contending with here about how to use our toolshow we should conduct policy in this new framework.  One, obviously, is using our balance sheet to influence the size of our monetary liabilities in an attempt to influence the growth of the publics nominal expenditures, and the other is to use our balance sheet to intervene in market segments that seem particularly strained and where consequences for the broader economy appear to be particularly significant. I think that the term asset-backed securities loan facility, which is our next program to be implemented, is illuminating here and raises significant questions about these two schools of thought. So I want to explore it for just a couple of minutes.  It is aimed at improving conditions in the market for securitizations of credit card, auto, and small business loans, with the hope of improving the securitization markets functioning and thus increasing the flow of credit to 
consumers and small businesses.  Quarterly interest rates on such securitizations have been exorbitantly high of lateI think Ms. Mossers presentation had them up about 500 to 600 basis 
points over LIBORand new issuance fell to virtually zero in the last quarter, as I understand it.  Expected loss rates on the underlying loan portfolios have risen significantly since September, 
 but there are some who argue that the spreads on AAA tranches are far too high to be explained by increasing loss rates alone. Another relevant factor is that there has been a widespread pullback from structured finance. Investors have lost confidence in some of the inputs into the securitization processrating agency assessments would be an obvious oneso investors are not willing to pay nearly as much now for consumer loan securitizations as they once were.  In addition, one hears other reports that some investors in this class of securitization are more reluctant to hold these securities now because of mark-to-market volatility, which for this class of investors passes through their income statement, in contrast with some of the issuers who, if they hold the same securitizations on their own balance sheet, dont have to run mark-to-market changes through their balance sheets.  So there is a certain comparative advantage in accounting treatment to the issuers holding these. This leads me to the next thing. I think the other side of these securitization markets bears a careful look.  We happen to have two of the largest credit card ABS issuers in our District. Both of these firms have simply declined to issue securitizations because it is cheaper to use their balance sheet.  Their funding coststhere was one issue, 2 percent, year and a half moneysome of them quote 1 percent for brokered deposits.  In comparison with that, the spreads in the secondary market that Ms. Mosser quoted are something like 5 or 6 percent.  So there is no way in which it makes sense for them to actually do the securitization.  Instead, they just hold it on the balance sheet. In essence, their demand for securitization funding is very elastic because the closest substitute is not much more costly.  As a result, the increase in funding costs hasnt been nearly as much for them as the increase in these spreads would indicate. 
 Now, you might think that the pressure this puts on these banks balance sheets would lead them to cut back credit extension at the margin as a result of this.  But both of these institutions report quite clearly and emphatically that their lending termsthat is to say, the decision algorithms for what to grant an individual consumerhave not changed as a result of this. They are still chasing consumers who are creditworthy.  These are getting harder to find because consumers are generally riskier now.  But these banks policies have not changed 
because of what has happened in the securitization markets.  This suggests that the disruption in securitization markets has had little effect on consumer credit availability.  This is consistent with evidence that I found in the back of the Greenbook that interest rates on credit cards and auto loans have fallen, not risen, over the past several months despite the increase in the ABS spreads, which would make you think that they would be rising. More broadly, securitization is a mechanism for reallocating risk.  But more fundamentally, it is a mechanism for arbitraging capital requirements and getting a more favorable regulatory treatment, capital treatment, by moving things off balance sheets.  So the question is, Do we have a policy interest in further subsidizing regulatory capital arbitrage? I dont think the answer is yes, and I dont think we have a broader interest in subsidizing securitization markets compared with on-balance-sheet lending.  Moreover, at the end of the year, banks are going to have to consolidate these securitizations on their balance sheets anyway, under FAS 140. So I am led to wonder:  Do we have a policy interest in reversing the steps they have taken already to adjust to this new accounting regime?  Again, I dont think the answer is yes. So the bottom line about the TALF is that I dont think it addresses a demonstrable market failure.  As I will speak about in a minute, I think doing this would channel credit away 
  from other worthy borrowers.  I think it exacerbates moral hazard, and I think it sets bad fiscal precedence. If we are going to expand our balance sheetand I do think it makes sense to do so right nowI believe we should do so in a way that is as neutral as possible across market segments.  I think the best way to do this is to purchase U.S. Treasuries.  What effect would this have?  Well, the natural benchmark, the simplest model you would write downand there are more-complicated models in which something else would happenis one in which the presumption would be that risky financial assets are priced off risk-free Treasuries based on the standard risk considerations, the standard asset-pricing considerations.  I dont see any particular reason to believe that those spreads would move one way or another in response to a change in medium- and long-term Treasury yields.  The staff memo on purchasing long-term securities gives a number of reasons that they recommend against the idea, and frankly, I dont find them very compelling because most of them apply with equal force to a targeted credit program like the TALF. The risk of increasing inflation by monetizing debt applies to both public and private debt, I think. The risk of taxpayer loss would seem to be even more of an issue if we take on credit risk in addition to interest rate risk. We heard earlier about our purchases of 30-year mortgage-backed securities and agency bonds. The deleterious effects of distorting relationships among various interest rates would seem to be more of a problem for targeted credit programs than buying U.S. Treasuries.  On this last point, the thought experiment I carry around in my head about this is to compare a targeted credit program such as TALF with a same dollar amount purchase of U.S. Treasuries.  The effect on the monetary base is going to be the same, by assumption.  But buying Treasuries is likely to lower rates across the board in the private sector, whereas the credit program is just going to 
lower the target rates, leaving rates in non-targeted market segments higher than they would be if we bought Treasuries. In other words, choosing a targeted credit program over buying Treasuries is like deciding to lower rates for borrowers in the targeted segment by drawing away funds from other sectors and raising rates in other sectors, compared with a program of buying a risk-free security like Treasuries.  I dont see a compelling reason to raise some borrowers interest rates in order to lower some other borrowers interest rates.  In particular, it is hard for me to see how we know this would have a positive effect on aggregate demand, on net. Now, obviously, we have a collection of credit programs on our books already, and we have been discussing the fundamental problem that these are likely to pose when the time comes for us to withdraw monetary stimulus.  The solution that I think you are right to pursue with the Treasuryand I would like to propose and I would advocateis that we transfer financing of our credit programs wholesale to the U.S. Treasury and that we work to establish a new understandingcall it a TreasuryFed credit accord, if you wantunder which we would agree that, henceforth, intervention in credit markets, apart from our usual peacetime-like discount window functioning, will be the responsibility of the U.S. Treasury. This would give us back control of the monetary liabilities on our balance sheet and would make it much simpler to find an exit strategy.  It would reduce the risk of loss to our capital accounts and the attendant reputational risk.  It would reduce the risk perceived by market participants that we might abruptly terminate some credit programs in order to reduce the monetary base. It would reduce the risk perceived by market participants that we might compromise inflation in order to sustain credit programs.  It would also reduce our vulnerability to the charge that we are using federal monies outside the constitutional appropriations process and that we have abused our powers by disguising asset purchases and credit guarantees, for 
which we do not have explicit authority, as loans.  This is what we have done in the Citigroup and Bank of America case, and it is one thing that makes me very uncomfortable about those programs and would lead me to favor proposing that the Treasury take on those guarantees as 
well, because there is nothing in principle that limits their ability or the FDICs ability to have taken on all of the risk in both of those cases. In short, my view is that, no matter how you feel about our credit programswhether you are for them or agin themit would be better for the Treasury to finance them.  I dont see any operational impediment to transferring our credit programs to the Treasury.  Our expertise is very critical to them, of course, but we have been lending our expertise to the Treasury for decades by performing fiscal functions for them and helping them run their debt auctions, and we have recently lent our people to staff the TARP, and I dont see any reason that our people 
couldnt continue to be involved in the administration of programs.  The Treasury would, obviously, have to issue additional debt to finance the programs, but the Fed would, in the first instance, have an equal demand for U.S. Treasury debt.  From the publics point of view, the initial implementation would leave their balance sheets unaffected.  Then, over time, we could vary the size of our balance sheet, independently of the size of the credit programs. I think you are right, Mr. Chairman, that this would be an uphill climb.  It would require broad agreement with the Administration and the Congress and perhaps even legislation.  But I 
think you are also right to note that this is an excellent opportunity in this regard.  We are on the cusp of sweeping revisions of decades-old laws governing financial regulation.  Consideration is being given, as you noted, to forming a so-called aggregator bank.  So I think it is a very good time to initiate a new understanding of the appropriate roles of the central bank and the fiscal authority. So I applaud your efforts to pursue those discussions.  There may be an aversion to 
 spending our political capitaland I know we marshal that very carefully here in the System on such a request. But we were willing to spend political capital in 1951 to gain control of the liability side of our balance sheet.  That is what the original TreasuryFed accord did, and that has been essential to the independent conduct of monetary policy since then.  So I think we are entitled to exert ourselves politically on this one.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate your indulgence. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I think, in principle, that we agree that it would be better to have all of this done by the Treasury.  I think we have to accept political realities, prioritize, and try to address the most important issues first and see how far we can get. On Treasuries versus other purchases, I dont want to get deeply into it, but any kind of model without perfect, complete markets has to recognize the existence of liquidity premiums, which can differ across markets and which affect the effect of a given amount of demand on a purchase of a given asset. So it isnt evident that applying our purchasing power on assets where markets are deep and liquid and liquidity premiums are low would have the same effect as on other markets where liquidity premiums are high.  But I am just addressing that there is a reason that it is not a purely neutral operation.  Yes? MR. LACKER. I dont want to go deeply into technical details either, but a certain presumption with regard to credit risk is that there are potentially adverse consequences of distorting relative credit risks across markets.  I dont see why the same thing shouldnt apply to liquidity risk. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I would say that the markets are already distorted.  We are starting from a point of the market not in equilibrium in the sense of normal long-time 
 functioning. We are starting with markets that are very out of joint relative to where they have been historically. So to say that you are distorting markets by the intervention, in fact we are actually trying to push markets back to something closer toward normality. About your point whether there is a market failure in the securitization market, I think there is absolutely a market failure in the securitization market, and you basically cited what it was. The very fact that securitization rates are well above the rates that the banks would demand to hold it on their own balance sheet tells you that the market is fundamentally broken down.  It is certainly true that those particular banks that you cited may not be balance sheet constrained, but the banking system as a whole is clearly balance sheet constrained.  What the TALF does is basically provide balance sheet capacity to the private sector that the banking system today cannot provide. Also, even if the ABS market is functional for those two banks that you note, there are a whole bunch of other problem areas in the securitization market that the TALF could be used to address in the future.  For example, the commercial real estate market is an area about which lots of people have been coming to us and saying, We are going to have a real problem refinancing the commercial mortgage loans that come due in 2009 because there is no balance sheet capacity in the commercial banking sector. So although it may be true for the two particular banks that 
you described, I dont think it is true for the banking system as a whole.  I think that the TALF can address a real market failure because it provides a number of things that the market cant get right now, which are balance sheet capacity, protection against downside risk, and term funding.  Those three things are not available in the market right now.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher, you had a two-handed intervention? 
  MR. FISHER. I do want just to jump in.  I thought your response was appropriate and correct, and obviously ultimately we would like to put as much of this back to the Treasury as possible. The ultimate objective is to insulate ourselves as a central bank as much as possible from political pressures, so we can do what central bankers do.  I might also add as much as possible from market pressures, but that is another matter.  But I disagree with the point made and I agree with the staff conclusionwith regard to the purchase of Treasuries.  It strikes me that there is enormous fear in the marketplace about the potential for open-ended stimulus in fiscal policy and there is great concern that we will acquiesce by monetizing fiscal policy.  I am very reluctant to go down that road.  That strikes me as one of the strongest arguments that the staff made.  At any rate, at this point I dont think it is necessary.  Rates are quite low as they are.  I disagree, Jeffrey, in ideal market situations, as the Vice Chairman just pointed outwhatever you are of this Committee [laughter]  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I am still trying to figure that out myself.   MR. FISHER. As one of our many Vice Chairmen pointed out, this is a highly distorted market, and I would suggestI was listening to what you saidin fact, the effort may lower Treasury rates at the price of raising other rates that you might crowd out perversely by supporting the Treasury market at this juncture.  So I would support the staffs recommendations. Because we have so many things on the table, I did have a question with regard to Brians point. That is, when would we consider closing a facility?  As long as we have these different facilities openand we havent shoved everything over to the Treasurymight it not send a good signal to the marketand I know President Plosser is probably going to talk about this a little, too, because we talked about it at lunch, just to be opento close down one of these facilities that was not being utilized.  For example, the AMLF or the MMIFFall of these 
 initialisms are getting confusingif they are not active, do we want to give to all of them the same time extension?  That is my question.  Now, you might respond that we dont know yet but 
they might be utilized.  I havent read through the specifics of your language proposition, but might we not at least make it clear that, if we feel that we have leeway, we could close down any one of these facilities while we extend their ultimate maturity?  So the real question is, Can we 
find something that we might actually close to demonstrate that we dont just have an open-ended book, until we reach the point that you wish to reach, Mr. Chairman, as you articulated and as President Lacker argued, where we shove this onto the Treasury? MR. MADIGAN. I think that general principle is right.  In fact, in the open market area we have wound down one programthe long-term RPs.  But right now I think that simply extending the facilities does not mean that they will necessarily be in place for the entire period of time.  The FOMC and the Board could evaluate, as time goes on, whether these programs are needed. I do think that closing down any of these programs at this time does run the risk of sending a signal that you think you are pretty far along in this process and you are going to start closing things down relatively quickly.  So I think it carries a risk. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish? 
MS. MOSSER. For what it is worth, I think that the signal to markets of closing even the dormant facilities, given my obvious view about how fragile things are, could actually have a pretty serious, significant, adverse effect, even though they are not being used.  They are viewed very muchparticularly the two facilities you mentioned and particularly the MMIFFas a backstop. We dont need it now. It is not priced attractively, frankly, given the spreads in markets.  But should we go through another period, heaven forbid, like September and October, 
it would be used, according to market participants. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser has been very patient.  May I turn to you? MR. PLOSSER. Well, some of my remarks were in fact going to be exactly this point that we need an opportunity to bolster our credibility.  As President Fisher said, I think we have an opportunity. The AMLF, in particular, is winding down.  It is not being used very heavily, and indeed it is a facility that is almost redundant given that we have the commercial paper facility and the MMIFF and all of those three programs are intimately related to one another.  It doesnt appear to me at all obvious that we need all of them.  Whatever the AMLF is providing could also be provided as backstop through the CP program and through the MMIFF.  So I think we could do ourselves a real favor and signal to the market that we are judicious, careful, and wise about our choice of programsthat when we believe we have redundancies in the programs we dont just let them run on and on and on.  I think it would do a lot for our credibility. There is another program that we havent really talked about in a while and that I think we could also eliminate without much consequence and have, again, a credibility issue with the distinction between us and the Treasury. In August, we had an agreement with the Treasury to allow the GSEs to borrow from the discount window.  The argument in that case was that we were doing that because the Treasury did not yet have the appropriations to do the lending and they needed to get that worked out.  They certainly now have that, and indeed, the GSEs are wards of the state. To the best of my knowledge, we have never lent to the GSEs through the discount window. I dont anticipate that there is any prospect that we will.  The fact is that we are buying agency debt as it is. To the best of my knowledge, we havent rescinded that authorizationor at least the Board hasnt rescinded that authorization. So I think these are two examples in which programs are actually not doing anything particularly. We have other means of backstopping the markets that we are worried about.  By 
beginning to show that we can be thoughtful in how we unwind some of this stuff, it could actually be a credibility-building device.  To the extent that there are very, very fuzzy lines out there in the world among the political classes, including the public, about where the boundaries are drawn between fiscal policy and monetary policywhich I believe is the casethese two actions might help us draw back and gain a little more clarity about what we are about and what we are not about. I would just say, Mr. Chairman, that I applaud your efforts with the Treasury on this, and I support them 100 percent and will do anything I can to help that along because I think it is a very, very important step.  I think that we could have an opportunity by extending some of the programs but not extending those that arent really doing anything. As long as I have the floor, Mr. Chairman, I would like to comment on a couple of other things. I think we need to work harder on developing the specific informationthat is, both data and qualitative informationthat we need to make our decisions exactly about extending or exiting from these facilities and any new ones that we might create.  This would help our own policy deliberations, making us more systematic in our approach, and would be beneficial to market participants, helping them learn what to expect from us.  Although the decision today for many of you may seem obvious that we should extend all of these facilities for fear of disrupting something or other, I think that, as we get closer in time to a situation in which we really do want to exit these programs, the decision process will become more difficult.  Having a more systematic, data-driven approach to making that decision in advance will do a lot to help us as we move forward. We presumably want to look at metrics to gauge the efficiency of these facilities in improving the functioning of particular markets.  In the past, we saw a great deal of information on spreads, but, as I have said before, I dont consider spreads as sufficient information.  
 Volumes are important as well, as I have stressed.  I appreciate the work of Spence and the staff. I thought that the detailed discussions of the different programs were very helpful, and I applaud the staff for that effort. But we also need to know what to do with those data and how we interpret and analyze the information.  As has been alluded to already, if trading is thin, for example, some spread measures may be completely irrelevant to thinking about some of this information.  It may be a demand problem as opposed to a market liquidity problem.  Moreover, I think we need an idea of what level of spreads and volumes we will be satisfied with when the time comes.  The memo from Vice Chairman Dudley on Desk authorizations talks about reducing spread levels more in line with historical norms.  Is that the right level?  What does that mean?  Does it mean that we have spread levels similar to those in July 2007? I very much doubt that. Shouldnt we be thinking that these spreads will be elevated perhaps for some time to come given the real credit risks that have been revealed in the current episode?  If so, how much higher?  And shouldnt we be thinking about spread levels consistent with weak or recessionary economic periods as a more proper benchmark in this environment?  It is certainly true that spreads on some consumer-type loans are very high.  But many are not out of line with what we have witnessed in other recessionary periods.  How do we tell the difference, and how do we think about that? In addition, to the extent that private-sector intermediation is broken and the Feds lending facilities are substituting for some of that role, it seems to me that you want to look at metrics to gauge the degree of private-sector intermediation.  I think that we need to focus more on the health of the banking sector itself, such things as loan growth and the use of reserves in 
the banking sector. As I discussed last time, I think quantities of these various measures on our balance sheet will be relevant for those sorts of discussions as to how we think that 
 intermediation process is functioning.  We need to pay attention to how we set prices in these facilities. We want to ensure that our lending facilities dont crowd out private-sector intermediaries when they are healthy enough to return to the market.  Otherwise, of course, we risk distorting the real price signals and potentially delaying the recovery of credit-market functioning. More discussion of price-setting in our facilities would be welcome.  We heard some of that today, and I applaud that.  Do we have the right penalty rates built in?  Are the 
auctions set at the right minimums?  Referring to these on a regular basis and discussing the implications they have on volumes would help us be alert to changes in markets and their functioning and help ensure that we are not delaying the markets from healing themselves.  So, overall, I think we should have a much more systematic analysis and discussion of these sorts of issues if we are to properly assess the effectiveness and necessity of these facilities. I have already talked about terminating some of these programs.  By letting programs like the authorization of the GSEs and the AMLF expireI think they are redundantand canceling this emergency access to the discount window, we can strengthen our credibility, we can further 
delineate the line between fiscal policy and monetary policy or between the Treasury and the central bank, and we will strengthen the belief that we in fact will withdraw from these special arrangements at the appropriate time and do so in a thoughtful way. I would like to talk just a bit about the purchases of long-term Treasuries.  The staff recommends keeping this program at bay for now or at least not implementing it.  I dont really have any strong objections to that.  I think the staffs memo, though, omitted one reason that buying Treasuries, in fact, might be desirable, and I really didnt find its arguments for not doing it terribly compelling either. I see some benefits to having more Treasuries in our portfolio, regardless of how one assesses the magnitude of the real economic effect on borrowing.  It might 
  prove easierand I think this gets back to the accord, Mr. Chairman, in your discussionfor us to unwind from some of these things if, in fact, we have Treasuries rather than MBS.  I think our credit programs do carry risks.  Aside from the moral hazard problems we have created, we face challenges when we attempt to liquidate particularly non-Treasury assets from our portfolio.  We will get pressure from various interest groups to retain certain assets.  We will certainly, in all likelihood, get calls from consumers, builders, and Congressmen if we start to sell mortgage-
backed securities out of our portfolio in order to reduce its size.  We will hear fears that the mortgage rates may rise.  We will have some market participants resisting our desire to pull back from our credit programs, fearing that markets remain too fragile or the economys headwinds are too strong.  I think we will make every effort to resist such pressures, but they could make it difficult for us to conduct monetary policy in a way that is consistent with our mandate, particularly our mandate for price stability.  Moreover, given that we have crossed the bridge on credit allocation schemes to specific markets, it will be much easier in the future for special interest groups to ask us to repeat such actions, especially if they cant get the answers they want from the political process. Thus, I thinkand I realize this view isnt shared by allthat the credit allocation schemes we are pursuing run a real risk of impinging on our independence and our ability to control our balance sheet and, hence, monetary policy.  Again, drawing back from the AMLF and perhaps the GSE discount window lending facility may help us begin to reassert a bit of that independence. For that reason, I am not uncomfortable with buying long-term Treasuries, partly because of their portfolio effect as a substitute for buying MBS.  Mr. Chairman, I think that your comments about moving more of this to the Treasury are exactly right, and it certainly applies to Maiden Lane. I think it would apply to the CPFF in some respects and perhaps to the TALF, as 
 President Lacker was suggesting.  I didnt find the staffs argumeterm Treasuries particularly compelling.  I guess I share President Lackers view that, if we are blowing up our balance sheetwhether we are blowing it up with MBS or with Treasuriesit is still expansionary monetary policy as far as I am concerned, and I dont think it should make that much difference on inflationary expectations. The staff also raised the problem of interest rate risks inherent in longer-term Treasuries.  Again, I dont see this as a particular problem distinct from our purchases of mortgage-backed securities, which also contain interest rate risk at the end of the day, if we have to sell them.  Both of these programs increase the maturity mismatch on our balance sheet in very similar ways. I am a little puzzledmaybe I will save this for the policy go-roundabout why we should leave the door open in the statement.  The estimated reduction in longer-term yields, as the staff suggested, is somewhere between 10 and 30 basis points, which is, at best, quite uncertain based on the empirical evidence. Putting aside my concern for portfolio composition and my preferring Treasuries, I dont find buying long-term Treasuries that compelling, except for this portfolio reason. Thus, a better reason for leaving the door open may be this portfolio argument, but I dont think we could explain that very well.  We could simply say that we continue to weigh the costs and benefits.  But I do have some reservations about continuing to discuss in our statement programs or actions that we might or might not take.  I think that there are certain risks to that in terms of making markets believe that we may do something, and then, if we dont do it, we lose some credibility.  But we can talk about that in the policy go-round.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, you had a quick two-hander? 
 MR. LACKER. In the interest of your interest in informal exchange, I was interested in responding to our new Vice Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. MR. LACKER. I dont understand in what sense the observation that prices are low and that quantities are very low constitutes a demonstration that the consumer-backed ABS market is broken down. Can you think of a model in which that results?  Yes, demand is low, and supply is elastic. I sketched out one. What we are talking about, it is important to remember here, is the interaction, the rivalry, between the balance sheet channel of credit flows and the securitization channel. A broad array of contractual features are important to the relative attractiveness for market participants of those two channelscovenants, risk allocation, regulatory and accounting treatments, and the like.  On balance sheet constraintswould some firms prefer that the demand for securitization be higher, high enough that securitization was less costly for them than holding it on balance sheet?  Yes, I am sure that is true.  But if that is the criterion for whether or not a market is broken down, then it is hard to see the difference between a market being broken down and just regulatory capture in some broad sense. You talked about markets being distorted already.  I can picture information constraints, verification costs, asymmetries, and the like that would lead market outcomes to be less felicitous for all concerned than they otherwise would be.  But, yes, information constraints constrain achievable outcomes, but so do technology constraints.  Would we be better off if we could get more output with the same amount of labor and capital?  Yes, we would.  But I dont think you would call the market distorted because that is the case. The question is why it is distorted.  If you come to me with a modelwith some story, not even a modelthat sketches out the interaction of information with technologies and with 
  market participants incentives that convinces me that markets are distorted in a way that government intervention can remedy, I am all ears, and I would be happy to talk about it.  I have been asking for that for a year and a half. I have been even doing the work for you.  I have been even bringing models to the table.  I havent gotten any information or any market observations that seem consistent with one story or another.  I am not sure that this request has been taken seriously. So, yes, if markets are distorted by something or other, fine, but that is hardly an answer for justifying the TALF in my view. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I guess this deserves an answer. [Laughter] Well, first of all, I think we have a fundamental disagreement about how we are looking at the current set of events. I think we are in the middle of a disequilibrium, not an equilibrium.  You are looking for models that describe equilibrium outcomes, and I think we are in the middle of a disequilibrium 
caused by the massive deleveraging of the nonbank balance sheet.  As that process unfolds, we are not where your model wants to describe. Number two, what we are observing is well outside the realm of historical experience.  So I think that to be able to produce a model that describes what we are seeing is very, very difficult because we have never been here before.  We are just generating the empirical data now to develop the model that we can actually test.  In terms of this issueis the securitization market evidence of market failure?I think my example is just a very simple one.  The fact that the bank, as you describe it, would rather hold these assets on its balance sheet than securitize them and AAA yields are higher than the net return to the bank of holding them on its balance sheet is telling you that there is a lack of arbitrage between the bank market and the nonbank market. 
   I think fundamentally we have a disagreement about what the process is that we are describing. You say, Show me a model.  I certainly want to see your model that describes what has happened over the past 18 months because I think it is very, very difficult to show that model as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I am going to regret this, but I am going to ask you a question. [Laughter]  Do you think the United States economy is at a Pareto efficient point at this moment? MR. LACKER. Probably. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. With the best position we can be at right now? MR. LACKER. Roughly speaking. All constraints taken on board. PARTICIPANT. What was the question again? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The question was, Is the United States economy at a Pareto efficient point at this moment?  And the answer was yes.  Okay. So that is obviously a different view. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, that is a fundamental basis of the disagreement. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. MR. EVANS. May I ask an information question? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. EVANS. President Lacker alluded to two banks that funded their operations at a very low rate.  Was that with the FDIC senior guarantee on their debt? MR. LACKER. One of them. 
MR. EVANS. That is a distortion that is helping them, right?  I am running into that when I talk to a lot of people.  I will come back to that. 
 MR. LACKER. I am fine with that, but MR. EVANS. Well, that is a distortion. 
MR. LACKER. That is a government intervention.  Are we intervening to make securitization just as subsidized as bank balance sheets? MR. EVANS. Our problem is that there is one distortion here, and then there is something else, and then they dont offset or they do offset, and people are inside or they are not. MR. LACKER. If we are in a world of second best, I understand that.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. We are in that world.  We definitely are. MR. LACKER. Well, then, what is it that unfairly tilts the playing field toward bank balance sheets?  I mean, you have this regulatory tax, and it tilts in the other direction. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You are exactly right that historically the securitization market has had elements of regulatory arbitrage. I think that is true. But I think, in this particular case, it is not really the reason that AAA ABS assets are still selling at such high yields right now. The reason that they are selling at high yields right now is that the borrowers who would love to invest in these assets on a leveraged basis cant get leverage.  Their inability to get leverage is being driven by the balance sheet constraints of the dealer and bank community, which is a disequilibrium event caused by their historically large mark-to-market losses and loan-loss provisions, which are depleting their capital and constraining their ability to lend.  So this is a disequilibrium.  Five years from now, we wont be here, and banks will have the ability 
to lend, they will be able to lend on AAA assets on a leveraged based, and AAA yields will be much lower. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me just say in response to President Plosser, I should tell everyone that, assuming that we extend these programs and the swaps, we will not announce 
    anything until Thursday morning because we want to coordinate with the foreign central banks.  Is that correct? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, first of all, obviously, please keep it confidential.  But could I ask the Board and the New York staff to have at least a discussion about the two programs that President Plosser mentioned, the GSE approval and the AMLF.  I think I would propose to extend the AMLF today as part of the package, but the Board would have the ability to reverse that tomorrow by notation vote if we decide that we get some kind of support.  Okay. MR. PLOSSER. The AMLF is not the FOMC; it is the Board. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I understand that, but what I am saying is that I am hearing what you are saying, and I think we ought to look at that particular program.  We have to be a little careful because we dont have a lot of advance time here. But we should look at that. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, quickly. MR. LACKER. Just real quickly.  Disequilibrium, in this context, is a non sequitur.  It is a conversation stopper. It is like appealing to astrologyit is the equivalent of that.  If we are out of equilibrium, what happens out of equilibrium?  What is determining what happens?  People make choices on their way to making adjustments.  They were in equilibrium when they 
made the choices that resulted in the losses, and now that equilibrium is playing out, obviously.  Would these leveraged borrowers like there to be a greater demand for their liabilities?  Yes. This all looks as though demand is low.  I will ask you a question.  The buggy whip industryis 
that sector broken? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig, on that note 
  MR. HOENIG. Oh, wow. [Laughter] Only 45 minutes later. MR. LOCKHART. Can you answer the buggy whip question? [Laughter] MR. HOENIG. I have heard that story, and I dont need to review it again.  I have just a couple of things that I want to comment on here.  First of all, I do appreciate this, because we are thinking about where we are and we are thinking about how we might exit this, even though we have a lot of turmoil ahead of us.  That much I appreciate.  I think that part of President Lackers point and the Vice Chairmans point may be that we are in an adjustment process.  We are deleveraging like crazy in this economy.  That resulted from an excess at an earlier point, and we are going to find a new equilibrium.  That is the process we are going through, and it is very difficult. Much of what we have done I wish had been done in the Treasury to begin with.  I still think that would have been the right call.  But it wasnt, so we are where we are.  How do we get where we are going, and how do we do this transition?  What we have are these facilities, and I hope that we use them temporarily.  I hope we do take advantage of working with the Treasury to move as much of it out as we can.  Some of it is self-liquidating, and I think we will get out of it. But some of it is not, and that is the part I would like to be able to push toward the Treasury, 
and that would be part of our plan. I would also say that I am reluctant to go with long-term Treasuries, not because I dont necessarily agree with some of what you are saying but because I am worried about some of the consequences of the perception that we are directly funding the Treasury and monetizing debt immediately.  I want to think that through before I get on that bandwagon, given where we have already come at this point. To change just a bit, Mr. Chairman, I want to talk about the TARP and the future as we go forward, as you have these discussions coming up.  I think there is no confidence in it.  It has 
 been inequitably administered across the United States, and that is why you have such bitterness about it. So in looking forward, we have an opportunity to do that better.  The way we outline how we are going to deal with financial institutions and banks in the future is extremely important now.  I want to thank Nathan for the summary report on the Swedish experience or the Nordic model and so forth because, as we talk about aggregator banks or RTCs or some approach to the problem, I think that is a very good model to look at.  It offers us opportunities to deal with this problem as it gets worse because I think the problems across a broader base of banks are getting worse.  Commercial real estate is now feeling a little pressure.  I think we are beginning to see a turn in agriculture again and a turn related to energy.  These problems are going to become more difficult, and how we go forward with the next iterationand I wouldnt call it the TARP any longerof this banking problem is important. One thing that I have some disagreement with regarding Nathans conclusions is whether we have the mechanisms to do a kind of Swedish model, given the more-complex institutions and the size of this country. But I suggest that we do.  We have a cadre of experienced people across the United Statesin the Comptrollers office, the FDICs office, and the Federal Reserves officesso that when this comes, if we think about it now and plan, we can begin to say which banks should be looked at. Part of the problem with the last issue of the TARP was that we went in and looked at a lot of these institutions and they were on the margin.  But we were changing the criteria as we went along instead of having the criteria set and going in and looking at these institutions.  Which ones are solvent at the moment, and for which ones would capital help maintain 
solvency?  You cant have any guarantees on this, given the trends in the economy.  But we 
ought to have a systematic, equitably applied solution for the next wave that is coming our way.  
That would be very important to have set up because it would help keep a lot of commercial real estate loans off our balance sheets.  If we handle the next section as we have the past around asset-backed securities, we are going to have a lot more assets on our balance sheet, and that does worry me.  So that is something for us to think about going forward. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. First of all, Mr. Chairman, I agree with your prioritization that, to the extent possible, it makes sense for the programs that have substantial credit risk to be borne by the Treasury. Obviously certain circumstances forced other decisions along the way, but I think that is a good prioritization.  Then the second prioritization is that ideally we would be focused on markets and not individual names, and thats consistent with moving the Maiden Lane facilities over to the Treasury to the extent possible.  I think both of those prioritizations make sense. On the AMLF, I actually was roughly at the same point in November, and its size has come down since then.  It has been interesting.  I have had a number of discussions with a variety of mutual funds about winding down the AMLF.  They dont view the AMLF as being the same animal as the other money market facility, and I have been told that it will take severe duress before they use the other facility because they are worried about stigmatizing themselves.  As for the AMLF, because it is the sale of asset-backed securities, there is not the same stigma attached. So actually we had $800 million come in today.  It was a money market fund that has experienced very substantial runoffs that are not occurring with other organizations.  I have been told that, even if it goes down to a small number, money market funds willingness not to hold extensive cash balances or very short term maturities is, in part, due to the fact that they can 
liquidate their positions in asset-backed securities relatively quickly.  The AMLF is not ideally 
  structuredI definitely agree with thatbut I am not sure that the other facilities are perfect substitutes. If we were not to extend it, I would want to do that only after some discussion with a number of money market fund families because I think we might find that it would have an effect on their willingness (a) to hold asset-backed commercial paper and (b) to hold a variety of other assets. I think that they would look for other ways to get much more liquid because, as has been highlighted, the financial markets are very fragile. MR. PLOSSER. May I just ask about that? The asset-backed paper that actually comes through the AMLF, is it mostly commercial paper? MR. ROSENGREN. It is all asset-backed commercial paper.  Its all A1/P1 asset-backed commercial paper. MR. PLOSSER. So they could also sell that into our commercial paper facility, could they not? MR. ROSENGREN. They are not issuers.  This is a money market fund.  The commercial paper facility is for issuers of commercial paper.  The AMLF is for money market funds. So they are not the same. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The issuer, in principle, could buy it back from the money market fund and then potentially issue into the CPFF, but that is not an obligation that the issuer would necessarily have. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you. MR. ROSENGREN. There has been an unwillingness to do that actually.  It has been the experience of the money market funds. In a more general sense, I think that, since the end of the third quarter, we have been in a situation in which both the securitization market has broken down and bank balance sheets are 
quite constrained, which is why we have seen spreads that are very, very large.  I do think that the various short-term credit facilities that we have established have both brought the spread down and brought more liquidity to the market more generally.  So in a general context, those facilities have been quite beneficial. I have just a couple of short comments.  First, in the earlier presentation, I noted that tangible common equity was highlighted in the slides, and I would say that a lot of our programs have been tied to preferred equity, and the markets, Moodys, and the rating agencies are focused on tangible equity. So whatever we do going forward, I think we need to spend a lot more time thinking about tangible common equity because we are seeing in supervision presentations that institutions that have substantial excess capital by regulatory ratios are also sometimes institutions that the market is running away from because, when they do the tangible equity calculation, its a problem.  So we ought to give a little more thought to common shares going forward. Second, I come out in a different place related to our purchase of mortgage-backed securities and GSEs. Mortgage rates have been around 6 percent for a year and a half.  After the announcement of the program, they went down to 5 percent.  The housing market has been the epicenter of this problem.  It is a problem both for the housing market and for financial institutions. Rather than cutting back on that program, if we are trying to have an effect on borrowing costs that affect the economy, that program would be the one I would expand.  I would expand that program and not do Treasury securities because Treasury securities are the one asset that everybody wants to buy now. So I am not sure that we have to get in line with everybody else to buy the same thing that everybody else wants and push down a rate that is already low. The problem is not that Treasury securities are too high.  The problem is that 
everything else is high relative to Treasury securities.  So if we want to lower borrowing costs, that is exactly what some of these facilities are designed to do, and that is what I think we need to do. So I am supportive of doing more actually for the mortgage market, and that is for discussion tomorrow. The TALF is of the same nature, and I think it actually is quite beneficial.  I would hope that we could get it operational as quickly as possible.  I know that dealing with accountants, lawyers, and others becomes very complicated, but I think that the sooner we get that up and running, the better. I do question whether the size is going to be appropriate if we really want to have a significant effect. We are going to have to look at both the size of that facility and the assets that we are thinking aboutparticularly the CMBS market that was alluded to.  It is designed to deal primarily with original issuers of these securities.  Another question that is similar to the problem assetfor holders of those securities, you could have a TALF-like program that deals with people who are holding those assets rather than issuing those assets.  That gets more at the financial institutions issues rather than at the issuers issues, but I think that is another program that we should at least think about as an alternative.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I agree with you, President Rosengren, about the objective of trying to lower the spread on the MBS, and the mortgage market is important.  However, another way of expressing one of my concerns is that, as we continue to focus on one asset class at a time mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed credit card debt, auto loansI worry that we are gradually being drawn into an ever-wider array of private credit markets and private asset classes and instruments that we will just gradually expand.  Where is the limit to this, and how do we 
     define what those limits are? How do we decide what the criteria are that constitute something important enough for us to intervene in that way?  I see this creep broadening our balance sheet in ever-greater dimensions in these private credit markets.  I worry that, in its doing so, the implication is that, almost in a negative feedback loop, each market is going to become dysfunctional by something so that it will drag us in.  My desire is to have better objective criteria that help us decide when it is appropriate and when it is not, because I think that we are just going down a slope here that is broadening the scope, which is not helpful for the institution. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser, we do have a shadow value on our balance sheet constraint, right? So we do have limits to what we can do, and so we have to make choices about where the impact will be most effective and where it will be the best for the economy.  Vice Chairman Dudley and then President Rosengren, and then I am going to go without hesitation to President Evans, who has been waiting. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There is a presumption in President Plossers remarks and President Lackers remarks earlier that, if we intervene in one market, we are going to make 
these other markets that are adjacent to those markets somehow worse.  In fact, we have seen in several cases that it actually does not work that way.  It works in just the opposite way. One good example is the commercial paper market in which the A2/P2 market has actually improved probably in part because of the commercial paper funding facilitys taking some of the strain off the commercial paper market.  So it might work that way sometimes, and improving one market may make another market worse.  But it also may be that improving the function of one market by providing balance sheet eases the aggregate balance sheet constraint, which then leads to improvement in other, adjacent markets.  So it is not necessarily true that doing something in one 
market makes other markets in which we are not intervening worse. 
MR. LACKER. If I may just comment on that, the important thing is to keep track of what sort of thought experiment you have in mind. A sterilized intervention, or an intervention in which you are intervening in a market and comparing that with intervening more broadly in Treasuries, is one thing. Another thing is an intervention that is unsterilized and that does not pull some other assets out of the market.  I would just point to Ms. Mossers presentation, which she opened with characterizing markets as that rates in markets in which we have intervened have broadly improved and rates in markets in which we have not intervened have broadly deteriorated. To me that has the flavor of consistency with the notion that our issue of liabilities and sale of Treasuries is pulling funds out of other markets and increasing rates. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But did they deteriorate because of our intervention? MR. LACKER. We have to fund it somehow, and the funding is going to pull money from somebody, right? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Did they deteriorate because of our intervention, or did they deteriorate because the macroeconomy was deteriorating at a very rapid rate?  I would argue that they deteriorated because the macroeconomy was deteriorating at a very rapid rate, not because of our intervention. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengrenquickly. 
MR. ROSENGREN. Just very quickly, in terms of the allocation, housing is an interest-sensitive component of GDP. Every time we change interest rates, we are in effect going to have an impact on housing, and it is going to be disproportionately borne by housing than other sectors of the economy because of its interest-sensitivity.  I view what we are doing with the MBS and GSEs as dealing with the one area that we can actually change.  I think it is going to have a much bigger effect.  In the Greenbook charts that we will be looking at tomorrow, if we 
  had a fed funds rate that we could lower, I do not doubt that we would be lowering the fed funds rate if we had that possibility. We dont have that possibility.  So we have to look to an alternative asset. Where is the biggest bang for the buck? Its probably in housing right now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will just make a couple of comments based on the discussion today. When it comes to the TALF, I find that I am of two minds.  I do think it will ultimately be useful for deploying important central bank liquidity in an attempt to provide more-accommodative conditions.  But I am concerned that we are picking winners throughout 
this process. When you mention that we are going to consider CMBS, I am reminded of the fellow who came to my office and gave me a presentation.  He owns shopping malls, and last fall he desperately needed funding and still does, but they are not worth very much at the moment.  He wanted a program like this, but it wasnt availableI do not know that it was, anyway.  I have also received phone calls from heavy equipment manufacturers in my District.  I know you have gotten a letter from at least one of them about their finance company financing.  For them the issue is that they are unlucky enough not to have a thrift through the OTS.  So they cannot get the FDIC unsecured-funding temporary guarantee on that, and their assets cannot be funded that way. There are some competitors that have access to this, and they have done very well, and 
others that havent. As we get into this allocation type of decisionmaking, I am not quite sure how we are going about doing it. Is CMBS selected because it is an important market that we 
need to keep functioning or because it is going to have a particular macroeconomic effect that is beneficial?  How does that compare with other sectors and whether they are on our radar screen or not?  Maybe that was the right decision, but when we select certain types of asset-backed securities to buyit is just very difficult. 
  I also want to agree with many of the comments that President Plosser made with regard to the programs that we have.  The briefing today was very helpful in describing the various programs.  I think we need some additional metrics along the lines of just routine types of statistics so that we can see and have a better idea.  Your familiarity is very great with these, and ours is not as great. I have to admit, as I look at it more, I find that, although I am very concerned about exit strategy in general, at the moment our balance sheet doesnt worry me quite so much. Finally, I want to applaud your comments at the beginning, Mr. Chairman, about discussions with the Treasury and that we, as best we can be, should be allergic to any attempts to use our balance sheet for long-term financing.  I think that is exactly right.  I wish you all the best for all of us. [Laughter] I have tried to grapple with the very vague discussions of aggregator banks, and when I talk to academics, they do not always help me because they resist the fact that public funds are going to be put into thisthey think that it really should be something that public funding is not a part of. If you pick a very large number that is required to take assets off the balance sheet of banksI do not know what the number is, but it is in trillionsand then you think about how the Treasury is going to fund this, the only way they can do that is by issuing Treasury bonds.  Ms. Mosser was talking about how $150 billion puts strains on yields.  I think you very quickly 
come to our balance sheet and how we are able to leverage up, and it even makes sense because why do the gross funding through bonds when it is really a net kind of funding against assets? So it makes a lot of sense, but it causes a lot of trouble.  I hope that I am wrong in thinking about that and that there are very easy ways out of it.  But those are some of our concerns, and they will be very important. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I certainly agree that you cannot trust academics.  [Laughter] President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a couple of curiosity questions really for the staff. If we were to convey assets to the Treasury and mark them to market at that time, let us say, Maiden Lane or AIG, what losses would we be recognizing at that point? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, we have a mark-to-market loss on the Bear Stearns assets in Maiden Lane I. We dont have mark-to-market losses in anything else.  What would be ideal would be to work out some arrangement.  It would take some accounting work, but at Maiden Lane I, we have a letter from the Treasury saying that the Treasury will bear those losses through seigniorage, and there should be some way to arrange an asset called future reductions of seigniorage or something like that that would make us whole.  I think that those things can be worked through, but obviously there is a lot of technical work to be done on that. MR. LOCKHART. The second questionnobody has mentioned any particular markets on our radar screen that, if we had criteria, we might intervene in.  But the one on which I get feedback is the municipal market, and we have a legal issue that we cannot lend to municipalities unless they happen to be corporations. Presuming for the moment that there was some legislative treatment of that, what is the status in discussing with the Treasury an intervention in that particular market?  It is a broken market as far as I can tell at this stage. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That has not come up. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I would say that the market is not doing well, but it is doing better than it was a month ago.  So it is improving, but I am not aware of the Treasury having this on the front burner. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The fiscal package has a great deal of money for states and localities, which would probably be the primary source of support for those. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In principle, you could set up an SPV that the municipality issued out of. That would be the corporate entity that we would lend to.  You could do that, but it is not clear whether this problem isnt going to gradually resolve itself. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I do want to pick up on what President Evans and President Rosengren said, which is that I think it is possible to set criteria, but there is a constraint on how much we can do in terms of both size and duration and, of course, limits on credit risk.  Given those constraints, we have to make choices.  Although I do not think that this is actually science here, I do think we can try to think about, for example, interest-sensitive sectors or sectors in which our interventions will have particularly strong effects on liquidity premiums and the like.  So it is not science, but I do think there is a sense in which we can make those choices and in which we are constrained. But I recognize that this is a whole new field. I would make the comment that I have had recent conversations with foreign leaders, including Prime Minister Brownall of whom said that the Federal Reserve is leading the way.  The United Kingdom is undertaking these programs.  Japan is undertaking these programs.  It is becoming a new approach.  When you hit zero, you have to think about other ways to affect the economy, and so at least in that respect we are not the outlier anymore.  President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you. A lot of ground has been covered, and I do not want to rehash things that have already been said. In general, I would just associate myself with President Rosengrens remarks and say that, with respect to choices that we have to make, I very much agree with the idea that a focus on mortgage-backed security markets is something that can be effective, is working, and deserves priority.  I also want to support the point that Bill Dudley 
   and others have made about commercial-mortgage-backed securities and the notion that this is something that was announced in connection with the TALF, that we were studying the possibility of extending this facility to commercial-mortgage-backed securities.  We have been following this quite closely, and I would like to agree with the points that Bill made about this. This seems to me like something that could be the next very serious problem for the banking system and for property prices in general. There is huge rollover risk here, where we have hundreds of billions of dollars of loans that are coming due on commercial properties for which the underwriting was originally pretty solid.  I am very concerned that the underlying economics is now deteriorating largely because of the economy, and banks obviously have very high concentrations. A lot of banks in this area are very loath to lend.  The commercial-mortgage-backed securities market seems to be completely dead.  I am really very concerned 
that, without the ability to refinance these loans, we are going to have properties dumped on the market and we will begin to see exactly the same thing happen with commercial real estate that we are seeing with housing.  It could lead to a further wave of unnecessary bank failures.  So although I am sensitive to the idea that, yes, we are making decisions about what sectors are deserving or are of priority in terms of credit allocations and there are counterarguments against our doing that, we do have choices to make, and I would focus a lot of serious attention on proceeding in that area. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me turn to Governor Kohn and then take a coffee break.  Then we can continue if people are so inclined.  Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Just a few quick points, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with those who say that it is very uncomfortable picking which markets to intervene in.  I wish we werent here, but we are.  I just do not see an alternative to it.  I think we have been here since August 07 really, when 
balance sheets constraintspeople were hoarding capital and liquidityimpaired the arbitrage among markets, and central banks had to use their balance sheets to step between private parties increasingly to take risks where the public was not willing to take risks.  Now governments are going to have to step in to spend where the public isnt willing to spend.  So we have this withdrawal from risk-taking, this hoarding of capital, not spending, and the governments role here is to step into that breach to keep the economy from shrinking even further.  Arbitrage is broken. I think there are balance sheet constraints.  Jeffs banks in the Richmond District may say that they have not changed criteria, but certainly the answers to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey suggest that banks in other Districts have tightened terms and standards for making consumer loans. It is really hard to judge which markets, I agree.  I think they should be important markets with systemic effects and ones where our intervention can make a difference.  It is really hard to say ahead of time, but we ought to be looking for those.  I agree that we need to be thinking about exit strategies and balance sheet constraints, but I sure hope we do not put emphasis on that. I think our problem right now, given where we are, is not how we are going to get out of this but how we can ameliorate the decline in the economy.  The more we talk about how we want to get out and the constraints, the less effective our policies will be.  I think that is what happened to Japan. The Japanese central bank kept talking about how they did not really want to be here, they could not wait till they got out, this was uncomfortable, and they did not want to be doing this. I think it undermined that aspect of the credibility of what the central bank was 
doing. So you are right. We need to have this conversation internally.  We need to keep three chess moves ahead in what we are doing.  But I wouldnt want worries about the size of our 
  balance sheet and our exit strategies to importantly constrain our ability to make a difference in credit markets going forward. On the buying of Treasuries, I would keep that on the table.  I think rates are already low, as President Rosengren and others have pointed out.  We do not really need to intervene there, whereas for mortgage-backed securities I think the interest rate risk is low because some of us might argue that those rates were too high relative to Treasuries and we are not taking the same kind of risk buying at that low price versus the high price that we might be with a Treasury.  But it is not really about the risk on our balance sheet.  It is about the effects we can have.  Those rates are already low. I do not think we need to buy Treasuries at this point.  I would keep that option on the table to see what happens to those rates going forward and where we think we can be most effective. In terms of worries about monetizing the debt, here I do agree with President Lacker. I think this is about inflation and inflation expectations.  We are, I hope, going to take some steps to make our inflation objectives a little clearer tomorrow.  I think we need to keep that in mind, and we should not have to worry about people accusing us of monetizing the debt.  We should keep our focus on the macroeconomic variables. Finally, on transparency, we have started up, as the Chairman said, a little working group to see what more we can do. We are concentrating in part on the collateral side.  Can we say more about collateral without impairing the functionality of our windows?  We are thinking about things we might add and publish quarterly instead of weekly and whether there is more we could do on that basis. Any suggestions that Reserve Banks have would be gratefully received.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Why dont we take a coffee break until 4:30, and then if anyone else would like to enter in when we come back, that would be fine. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Lets resume.  I do not want to cut anyone off. Would anyone else like to comment?  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to play the role of provocateur here and ask a couple of questions that are in the spirit of having a wide-ranging and strategic discussion, as we are having here.  Here is something that people said to me recently. This is a question for Mr. Sheets about swap lines, one of our favorite topics.  Here is the statement: 
These swap lines are giving control of the U.S. monetary base to foreign governments, especially through persistent and large usage by the foreign central banks.  I will stop on that one and see what you think about that. MR. SHEETS. In each one of the disbursements under these lines, the Federal Reserve and the FOMC have the prerogative to determine whether or not it is in our interest to go forward with the swaps.  So I think that we maintain a crucial governance role.  If we come to the 
conclusion that at some point the costs of this program or the costs of extending that dollar 
liquidity outweigh the benefits, then we can start winding up the program.  So I dont think that is right. MR. BULLARD. So what is the magnitude right now of the swap lines that are outstanding? MR. SHEETS. The total outstandings are around $465 billion. 
MR. BULLARD. Okay. So a scenario would be that you go over the next five years, with zero nominal interest rates and an ongoing financial crisis, and these things stay out there 
  because of needs for dollar funding in Europe.  Now you had a permanent one-time increase of, say, $500 billion in the monetary base. Isnt this what we are looking at? MR. SHEETS. Well, for what it is worth, our forecasts of the European economy and European interest rates are not consistent with that scenario. Market expectations are not consistent with that scenario.  I hope that is not what we are looking at. MR. BULLARD. Okay. I am just trying to ask a series of provocative questions. MR. SHEETS. You are doing a good job. MR. BULLARD. Thank you. [Laughter] 
MS. MOSSER. May I add one parenthetical point to that?  The swapsunlike the TALF, for exampleare priced at a penalty to market rates, and to the extent that market spreads do come down, as we have seen in the past two months, swap lines do self-liquidate.  They have declined very noticeablythey were nearly $600 billion at one point.  As the spreads come in, effectively the private sector comes in and undercuts the central bank, which was by design. MR. BULLARD. Okay. Thank you. So now I am going to try to reconcile Presidents Lacker and Rosengren [laughter] and get your and our new Vice Chairman Dudleys reactions. My experience in economics is that it is not that helpful to talk about equilibrium and disequilibrium. So I am going to talk about it in a different way.  You have firms and people who do the best they can, given the constraints that they face.  There are frictions out there, and we know what the friction is here.  It is a very severe information friction in certain financial markets.  It is a crisis of financial engineering in which, when the new financial instruments were created, they were thought to be good devices, but they turned out to have serious transparency 
issues and that created information problems.  So now you say that, given that friction, I am going to let everybody optimize.  Jeff will say, well, that is a Pareto optimum given the friction 
and, if there is nothing you can do about the friction, then that is the best you can do.  But if there is some policy you can do to ameliorate the friction and pull that out, you will get a better solution. I would say that that is Mr. Dudleys position.  The position that it is just technology and there is probably nothing we can do about the crisis in financial engineering would be the Lacker position. I was wondering if you guys would react to that and see if that reflects your views. MR. LACKER. I will say yes, [laughter] with the additional note that with that answer alone you might wonder why I get so exercised, but it is that withdrawing that friction does not seem to be what any of our programs have been designed to accomplish. MR. BULLARD. Yes, and I agree with that. There seem to be a lot of things that are being done in many parts of the government and maybe parts of the Fed that are not really getting at that information friction.  So I am going to ask the most provocative question of all.  The Chairman said at the beginning that we should obviously be allergic to taking on credit risk, and normally, I think everyone here agrees with that.  But maybe now is the time to rethink that.  You have a serious information problem out there.  You have a lot of reactions to that that are tangential to the core problem, and we are talking about doing open market operations, which used to be always in Treasuries, now in MBS. It would not be that hard to say lets just do the open market operation swap of money for a financial instrument using the toxic assets that are such a problem in this economy.  Normally I would not say things like this, so I am stepping out of character. But in the interest of provoking discussion, maybe now is the time to at least start thinking about something like that.  That would get to the heart of the matter.  If you try to go through the Congress, they are wonderful people and everything, but the process gets politicizedand we know this; we are seeing that alreadyand so all kinds of other things get 
 done. This would get at the core of the problem.  You would be taking on risk, but you take on some interest rate risk even when you buy Treasuries.  The whole idea would be to price these at the right price, which I understand is very tricky, but who better to do it than the 500 economists that hang out at the Fed?  So I dont knowshould it necessarily be a 100 percent benchmark that we do not want to take on credit risk, or should it be only a 95 percent benchmark or something like that? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me say something about these frictions and why we can affect them.  There are two frictions that I think are important.  One of them relates to the friction of illiquidity.  It is a tradition of central banking that we lend against illiquid assets when there is 
a panic run, and we know that panic runs are equilibrium phenomena and they can occur even though the assets are worth more than the liabilities.  I would argue that that kind of phenomenon has generalized into a lot of aspects of our economyfor example, the funding of various kinds of off-balance-sheet instruments, the commercial paper market, the money market mutual funds, and lots of other vehiclesand a lot of what we are doing is very much consistent in spirit with the idea of providing backup liquidity to allow firms to meet redemption demands without having to sell off assets into illiquid markets.  I think that is the thrust of a lot of what we are trying to do. The other type of friction that I think is important has to do with information capital.  There is a sense in which the capital of the banking system is the most important wealth in the world because it supports the information gathering and other institutional activities that banks can do. When, for whatever reason, there is a loss of bank capital and their activities are restrained and they are not able to make full use of the information and other skills that they have; that is a problem.  I would argue that in a world where there are other frictionssticky 
 prices or wages, for examplethe inability of the banks to fully use their information capital to extend credit and make loans and make markets will lead to a bad outcome for the economy as a whole. The intellectual argument then is that there is a social benefit, a social externality, to providing more capital, and that is what a lot of the TARP and these other things involve. Now, traditionally in your comment about credit, it is not easy to make a clear distinction.  There is always the issue of liquidity versus solvency and so on, but it is not easy to make a clear distinction between lending against solvent but illiquid assets versus providing capital for informationally intensive agents, like banks.  So that line is not completely clear.  But by history and tradition, the central bank has always leaned toward liquidity provision.  The government has always leaned toward credit allocation.  I think that is a distinction that is worth trying to preserve, although admittedly we are not always going to do it perfectly.  So I think we can specify what the frictions are, make coherent sense of them, and try to explain how our actions are related to them. MR. BULLARD. We do not want to maintain that if it is going to send us into an even more prolonged downturn. I mean, it might be nice if we always did liquidity and Treasury always did credit, but I am saying CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, we have taken on credit risk in emergency situations, as you know. But as I promised at the beginning, I think to the extent that we can use the opportunity of a new Administration and so on to clarify responsibilities in a better way, then we ought to do so. I think we all appreciate what an extraordinary situation we are in and have experienced for the last eighteen months.  A lot of what we are doing is requiring our good sense and historical knowledge and our intuition.  But as I think maybe the Vice Chairman mentioned, 
 we do not really have the historical basis for all of the things that we are having to deal with here. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman, thank you.  That was a very clear and lucid description of what the core crystallized issues are regarding frictionsregarding the thing that in my fogged state I was not able to articulate to Vice Chairman Dudley a minute ago.  This is what I think we have been struggling to get our hands around, and so I appreciate your clear articulation of that. As you know, these are sort of classic problems in banking economics.  About liquidity, I am struck by the hedge funds.  To date as far as I knowmaybe New York knows about one that is about to blow upwe have not been challenged by them.  Here is a set of participants not viewed as likely to benefit from the safety net that, over the past couple of years, have structured their liabilities in a way that makes them relatively insulated from run-like phenomena.  That illustrates the broader point about models of panic-stricken runsthe extent to which you issue a contract that makes you vulnerable to that is endogenous and leads me toward wondering if the safety net has really been what is driving the instances of run-like behavior not only in the banking system. On informational capital, I think you are right on target there. Obviously, it was the subject of your very seminal research, inspiring to all of us.  There I think about a lot of the pulling awaypeople taking their loan accountsfrom Wachovia and Governor Dukes bank a year ago telling me that they were picking up customers that were uncomfortable working with Wachovia or B of A. Switching costs are there for sure.  But I struggle with how hard they are and, again, appreciate that you have crystallized genuine scientific issues to clarify the discussion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. 
  MR. STERN. Well, I was just going to comment on Jeffs comment.  I think the hedge fund industry for the most part has weathered this remarkably well, but of course, the five biggest hedge funds, Goldman, Merrill, et cetera, et cetera, are gone.  What is left is a good deal smaller and presumably a lot less consequential than the ones we have seen. Let me just add, Mr. Chairman, that I agree 100 percent with what you just said.  We have long had a system in which the commercial banking system has been a backup source of liquidity to other financial institutions and the nonfinancial sector as well.  For a variety of reasons, partially because of what has happened to capital and partially because the shadow banking system is growing so rapidly relative to the banking system, even though I would say banks in the aggregate are continuing to play that role, it has become increasingly difficult for them to function effectively as the backup source of liquidity.  I think that is an important justification for the actions we have taken. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Just to respond, Jeff, to the comment that the hedge funds havent faced a run-like phenomenon. One of my contact conversations with a hedge fund manager effectively said, We are in a run.  This period is a run.  It is a run that has episodes at the end of quarters and so forth, so it operates a bit differently, but the effect is the same. MR. LACKER. Well, if I could, Mr. Chairman, just to be clearit is not that they are not subject to runs; it is that runs dont bring them down the way an institution like a classic bank in 1932 would have been brought down by a retail run. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As you point out, an important point is that institutional structures, contracts, and so on are endogenous, and policy affects them.  But we are in a situation at this point where past is past and what is sunk is sunk.  We have to deal with the 
     situation. And it is very, very important for us to go forward to try to change the legal structure, the regulatory structure, and even Federal Reserve operating procedures in ways that will encourage more-stable systems in the future.  But at the moment, the fire is burning, and we have to think about that. MR. LACKER. If I could, that is a very important insight.  It is part of the classic tension between healing now versus looking at what we are doing as part of a repeatable process from which people are going to be forming expectations about our future behavior.  That is the inevitable tension. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, that is right. All right. Unless there is anyone else, let me thank you for a very useful discussion.  I am sure that we will have more in the future, but this really sets the parameters and the issues.  I took many things away from this discussion.  One of them is that we need to keep thinking about our metrics regarding the efficiency and efficacy of our programsin particular, how the shadow value of duration or illiquidity in our balance sheet is matched against the benefits of a particular program that has certain implications for our balance sheet. I would challenge the staffas all the hard tasks go to the staffto think more about how we can evaluate the efficacy of our programs, in particular, and the opportunity costs as well, in terms of the space they take up or the duration that we create in our balance sheet.  One useful exercise that we ought to be thinking about is, if we were to go another step, where would it be and on what criteria would it be decided.  That would perhaps answer the question about there being no plan, no control, and no delimiting factors.  I think that we can make progress on trying to answer these questions.  It is not going to happen immediately, but I hope over time it will help. 
 MR. LACKER. I have a request, Mr. Chairman.  I asked the System Open Market Account manager a couple of days ago, but now he is not the manager anymore.  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I did that on purpose. MR. LACKER. You just didnt want to do it.  Tomorrow or maybe today we will hear about a forecast for the path of the federal funds rate.  In creating that, it is endogenous.  It depends on the economy, but it also affects the economy.  I was wondering if we could get one for our balance sheet, subject to uncertainty of all the obvious kinds.  It would be useful to help us think about the capacity of programs and extending them.  I think it would be useful. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree with that, and I thought we would have done more of that today, in fact. But what we can doand what we ought to think about for future referenceis maybe scenarios as opposed to forecasts.  That might be a better way to think about it. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I was going to ask exactly the same question.  So thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  If we are ready, we still have some votes to take here. Let me first ask the FOMC to do the routine ratification of domestic open market operations. Do I have a motion? MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any discussion?  All in favor? 
PARTICIPANTS.  Aye. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Opposed?  Hearing no objection, thank you.  All right. Now, to approve the extension of the programs, I would like to propose that we extend the list of programs through October 30, as proposed by the staff.  We should have some discussion about the AMLF and others, recognizing that, even if we announce an extension, rationalization down 
  the road or restructuring is always a possibility.  So this would be a motion for the Board to extend the 13(3) programs. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All Board members okay with this?  All right.  Hearing no objection, thank you. We need from the FOMC a resolution to extend the swap arrangements through October 30. A motion? MR. KOHN. So move. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Further comments or discussion? Any? All right. Any objections?  Not hearing any objections, the motion is approved.  We need a separate resolution from the FOMC to extend the TSLF through October 30.  Motion? MR. KOHN. So move. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any concerns, objections, or comments?  Hearing no objections, thank you. All right. Let me remind you again that this is all confidential until Thursday morning because we want to coordinate our announcements with other central banks, and we will take the opportunity to at least look at the two programs that President Plosser mentioned. Let me turn now to the economic situation.  Boy, I think it has been a while since we were three and a half hours into the meeting before we got to the staff forecast. MR. STOCKTON. The GDP is a little smaller than it was at the start of the meeting.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Actually I do not want to give President Lacker any concerns about whom he is listening to.  So I want to introduce Dan Sichel, Karen Dynan, and Trevor Reeve, who will be presenting the outlook.  Dan. 
                                                      2 The materials used by Mr. Sichel, Ms. Dynan, and Mr. Reeve are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). MR. SICHEL.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill be referring to the material labeled Staff Presentation on the Economic Outlook.  The incoming data largely have ratified the bleak near-term outlook we projected in the December Greenbook; the spending data have painted a gloomy picture, and readings on employment and production were even weaker than we had expected.  Starting first with the employment data, the top left panel of exhibit 1 shows the dramatic worsening of the labor market in recent months.  Private payrolls declined almost 520,000 per month on average in the fourth quarter. The panel to the right shows manufacturing industrial production excluding motor vehicles.  Factory output has been plummeting as manufacturers are responding aggressively to declines in both domestic and foreign demand. The motor vehicle sector has been hit particularly hard.  With extremely sluggish sales, automakers have been slashing productionplotted in the middle left paneland we anticipate a sizable further reduction in assemblies this quarter. Turning to households, the latest data confirm that consumers continue to retrench. As shown by the blue bars, real PCE for goods other than motor vehicles appears headed for a very large drop in the fourth quarter, and we anticipate a further decline this quarter. These projections are similar to those in the last Greenbook.  In the housing sector, starts (the black line in the bottom left panel) declined further last month and now are less than one-quarter of their peak level in 2006.  With the level of permits (the red line) still below starts, we expect further declines in starts in the next few months.  All told, as shown to the right, we project that real GDP contracted at an annual rate of about 5 percent last quarter.  Given the greater weakness in the employment and production data, we have lowered our forecast for the first-quarter 
change in real GDP to minus 5 percent. In the second quarter, the rate of decline in real GDP moderates as the new fiscal packagediscussed more in a minuteboosts demand. The top left panel of exhibit 2 summarizes the medium-term outlook for real activity.  We anticipate that recovery will begin, albeit slowly, in the second half of this year, with real GDP projected to increase at an annual rate of about 2 percent; next year, output is expected to rise about 2 percent.  The box to the right lists key factors contributing to the onset of recovery:  Financial stress begins to recede, housing begins to stabilize, monetary and fiscal stimulus provide a boost to demand, and inventory liquidation comes to an end.  Regarding fiscal stimulus, although the precise composition of what will be passed remains a moving target, we now assume 
a package of $800 billion, $300 billion more than what we penciled into the December Greenbook.  The larger size of the package is an important source of our 
slightly stronger outlook for economic growth than in the last Greenbook.  The bullets in the middle left panel highlight our estimates of the response to the various provisions of the plan. Households begin spending the tax cuts of $180 billion and transfers of $90 billion when received.  On the other hand, we expect the investment response to the business tax cuts to be limited.  In addition, of the total new funding for state and local governments, we project that only 40 percent will be spent by the 
        end of 2010 as infrastructure projects take some time to get under way and as the spending of other grants is smoothed out somewhat.   The panel to the right puts the pieces together.  We estimate that the fiscal package will boost real GDP growth by a bit less than 1 percentage points this year and almost 1 percentage point next year.  Our estimates of the GDP effects are smaller than those of some other analysts, with the discrepancy mostly reflecting our 
assumption of slower spend-out rates by state and local governments.  Inventory 
dynamicsthe subject of the bottom panelsare another element importantly 
shaping the recession and recovery.  The table in the bottom left reports the 
contributions of inventories to real GDP growth in key periods over the business cycle. The first column shows the contributions in the current episode, and the second column shows averages for the postwar period.  As can be seen on line 1, in the year before the peak in real GDP in 2008:Q2, inventories were already being liquidated aggressively, in contrast to the usual positive contribution.  As shown on line 2 of the table, from the peak to the trough, inventories hold down real GDP growth only a little. Because inventory liquidation was already quite rapid before the peak, once the contraction in sales got under way, the rate of liquidation needed to steepen only a bit more.  In contrast, during many past episodes, the drag from inventories was much larger as manufacturers had to play catch-up once sales turned down. In the year after the trough (line 3 of the table) liquidation comes to an end, and the swing in inventories boosts real GDP growth 1 percentage point, about in line with historical averages.  This increase in the inventory contribution is an important feature of the projected recovery in real GDP.  Karen will now discuss developments shaping the outlook for households and businesses. MS. DYNAN. Exhibit 3 covers the housing sector.  As can be seen in the top left panel, our forecast calls for single-family housing starts to bottom out in the first half of this year and to move up gradually thereafter.  One factor behind the projected improvement in housing demand is the interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages, shown in the top right panel.  This rate fell sharply following the November 25 announcement of the Federal Reserves MBS purchase program, and 
we expect it to remain low over the next two years. That said, our projected pickup in housing activity is quite modest, as mortgage credit remains more difficult and more expensive to obtain than might be implied by 
the conforming mortgage rate alone.  As summarized in the middle left panel, the disappearance of nonprime mortgages from private sources makes it much more difficult to obtain mortgages for households lacking solid credit histories, unable to make significant down payments, or in need of low introductory interest rates.  Part of the gap has been filled by an increase in originations associated with Federal Housing Administration programs, but such originations remain far below the level of private nonprime originations at their peak.  In addition, lending is now more restrictive than in the past to those seeking to finance an amount above the conforming limit. 
    Housing demand is likely also being damped by an expectation that house prices have not reached their trough. We project that house prices will decline significantly further before flattening out at the end of 2010.  As shown in the middle right panel, this decline pushes one measure of the overvaluation of housing that we monitor well into negative territory. Prices typically overcorrect at the end of housing cycles, but this correction is amplified by the extent of the earlier overvaluation and by the excess supply of unsold new and existing homes that we foresee over the forecast period. The bottom left panel shows one implication of the bust in house pricesa rise in the share of prime and subprime mortgages with low current equity.  As shown on lines 1 and 2, the recent declines in house prices have led to considerable increases in the shares of mortgages with equity below 20 percent.  Moreover, as indicated on lines 3 and 4, the share with negative equity has also increased rapidly.  These low levels of home equity, along with greater job losses, have pushed foreclosures shown in the bottom right panelto very high levels.  In 2008, lenders initiated more than twice as many foreclosures as in 2006.  Notwithstanding the government foreclosure mitigation efforts embedded in our forecast, we expect prime foreclosures (the red portions of the bars) to remain high this year before diminishing somewhat in 2010. Subprime foreclosures (the blue portions) are projected to show a more pronounced decline largely because the stock of outstanding subprime loans is shrinking in response to the cessation of new loans and the termination, through default or refinancing, of existing loans. Exhibit 4 features our outlook for consumer spending.  Real disposable personal income (the blue bars in the top left panel) fell in the second half of last year, but real consumer spending (in red) declined even more sharply.  Disposable income is projected to step up early this year as a result of the sizable personal tax cuts and increases in transfer spending built into our forecast.  Despite the support from fiscal measures, consumer spending is projected to increase only weakly this year and moderately next year. The saving rate (the black line in the panel at the right) is projected to move up sharply in early 2009 as the tax cuts are only gradually spent.  We expect saving to remain elevated over the next two years, in part because of the sharp drop in household wealth relative to income (the red line) and because of households greater uncertainty about their income prospects.  We think that spending 
will be damped in coming quarters as well by difficult borrowing conditions.  The 
middle left panel shows two important sources of the credit available to finance consumer spending.  The blue portions of the bars correspond to housing equity tapped through home equity loans and cash-out refinancings; surveys suggest that households traditionally put perhaps one-fifth of such funds toward consumer purchases. As can be seen, mortgage equity withdrawal declined sharply last year.  Consumer credit (the red portions of the bars) also fell off over the year, turning negative by the fourth quarter. The declines in household borrowing reflect, to some extent, reduced demand for loans, as the weaker economy has led households to defer spending.  However, as 
    illustrated in the middle right panel, a reduction in supply is clearly playing a role as well, with banks continuing to tighten standards on consumer loans.  Developments in the consumer ABS market are contributing to the tighter credit conditions for households. The market has seen very little issuance since October, and spreads have been very high.  The commercial banks that make most credit card loans have access to alternative sources of funding, such as deposits and various new forms of support from the government.  In contrast, the finance companies affiliated with auto manufacturers, which traditionally have been an important source of auto loans have 
not (for the most part) had access to these alternative sources.  The bottom right panel shows the dollar volume of new loans per vehicle soldone metric of the extent to which the finance companies support sales. This indicator had been fluctuating 
around $5,000 per vehicle, but dropped to less than $3,500 in November.  That said, loan originations should pick up this year, with the expected implementation of the TALF, and GMAC, now a bank holding company, having announced that it will resume lending to some consumers with weaker credit records. The next two exhibits focus on business investment and finance.  The top left panel of exhibit 5 depicts a key underpinning of our investment forecastthe accelerator mechanism.  Business fixed investment as a share of output (shown in red) tends to track the lagged growth rate of output (in black).  The sharp deceleration that we have seen in output is expected to exert a significant drag on investment this year and next. Indeed, as shown by the red bars in the panel to the right, we estimate that business spending on equipment and software fell nearly 10 percent last year, and we project it to decline by an even larger amount this year before making a moderate recovery in 2010. Investment in nonresidential structures held up better in 2008, but 
we expect a sharp decline this year and a further decline in 2010, due in part to the lags in planning and implementing new structures projects. Spending in the business sector is also held down by credit market conditions.  Firms are finding credit expensive and more difficult to obtain because investors are demanding extremely high returns for holding risky assets.  In the stock market, the dramatic decline in equity values over the past year has pusheprice ratio (the red line in the middle left panel) well above the range seen over the 
past quarter century. The gap between this ratio and the real Treasury perpetuity yield (shaded in turquoise in the left panel and plotted as a line on the right) is a rough measure of the equity risk premium.  At more than 10 percentage points, the gap is extraordinarily high by historical standards.  Spreads on corporate bonds are also extremely elevated, keeping yields relatively high despite substantiaterm risk-free rates.  As can be seen in the bottom left panel, yields on 10-year BBB-rated bonds have fallen since the December FOMC meeting but remain at the high end of their range since 2002. That said, issuance of nonfinancial investment-grade bonds, shown in the inset box, moved up in the fourth quarter and has held up in at a 
solid pace in January. Yields on speculative-grade bonds, shown in the bottom right 
panel, also remain unusually high, and speculative-grade issuance, though up somewhat in January, is still fairly weak. 
    C&I loans from commercial banks represent another important source of funding for businesses. As shown in the top left panel of exhibit 6, C&I lending fell off sharply at the end of last year, and we expect it to remain weak this year.  We believe that the downswing partly reflected reduced demand for loans as businesses trimmed plans to invest and, after relying heavily on bank lines while credit markets were disrupted in the fall, turned back to other sources of funds, such as corporate bonds.  However, the supply of credit has also been reduced.  As shown in the top right panel, most of the senior loan officers we just surveyed reported having tightened standards on C&I loans further and having increased the spreads of loan rates over their cost of funds. The next four panels turn to some of the factors that have exacerbated the credit problems in the commercial real estate sector.  As can be seen in the middle left panel, rents (the red line) have decelerated sharply over the past two years, and vacancy rates (the black line) are on the rise.  Prices for commercial properties, shown on the right, turned down sharply in late 2007 after soaring over the preceding 
three years.  Our forecast calls for a significant further price decline.  These weaker 
conditions have contributed to rising delinquencies among commercial real estate loans, as seen in the bottom left panel. The delinquency rate on such loans held by commercial banks (the turquoise line) climbed further in the third quarter.  As shown in red, the delinquency rate on loans in commercial-mortgage-backed securities (or CMBS) has been rising as well. The box to the right summarizes key implications of the shutdown in the CMBS market.  Although the market traditionally has provided 
very little construction financing, the inability to issue should add to the pressures on banks balance sheets and thereby indirectly damp structures spending.  In particular, if it remains closed, the CMBS market will not be able to help refinance the large amount of bank construction loans expected to come due this year, as it would in normal times.  In addition, a smaller amount of loans currently within CMBS will 
come due this year and will need new financing from alternative sources such as banks. Dan will pick up the discussion from here. MR. SICHEL. The top left panel of exhibit 7 provides some longer-term context for the deep recession and sluggish recovery that we are projecting.  The red line shows the level of real GDP, indexed to its own peak in the second quarter of last year. By way of comparison, the green and blue lines show the paths of real GDP during the recessions that started in 1973 and 1981, respectively.  As noted to the right, the projected contraction in real GDP in the current episode is broadly in line with those two earlier big postwar recessions, but the projected recovery is noticeably more sluggish. In part, this pattern reflects the influence of financial turmoil on the macroeconomy. Gauging the hit to the economy from the recent financial stress is, to put it mildly, an inexact science.  One benchmark is the typical pattern experienced by economies during and after the onset of financial crises.  As noted in the bullets in the middle left panel, research on this topicmost notably the work by Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoffindicates that downturns linked to major financial crises in 
     advanced economies tend to be severe.  Reinhart and Rogoff identify five major financial crises in advanced economies in the postwar period; these include Spain in 1977, Norway in 1987, Finland and Sweden in 1991, and Japan in 1992.  The panel to the right shows one possible metric for gauging the magnitude of output loss in these episodes. The first blue bar shows average growth in real GDP in these five countries during the four years prior to the crisis.  The red bar shows average growth in the worst two consecutive years after the onset of the crisis.  The average step-down in real GDP growth after these financial crises was about 5 percentage points.  The right-hand side of the bar chart shows figures for the current episode in the United States. The blue bar shows average growth in the four years before 2007, the date used as the onset of the crisis. The red bar shows our projection for average growth in the worst two years following the onset, 2008 and 2009.  On this metric, we are 
projecting a pattern similar to, though not as severe, as these other episodes.  Still, we see the evidence from past financial crises as suggesting that the risks to activity are tilted to the downside. The bottom three panels highlight the alternative simulation in the Greenbook that explores that possibility. As you know, in the baseline forecast we anticipate that financial market strains will gradually wane over the next two years.  In contrast, in the more financial stress scenario, we assume that risk premiums on a variety of securities move up significantly from their current levels and then come down more slowly than in the baseline. As shown to the left, real GDP in this scenario contracts considerably in 2009 and increases only a little in 2010.  The unemployment rate (the middle panel) peaks at 9 percent, and core inflation (the panel on the right) moves 
below zero. The top panels of exhibit 8 examine the cyclical properties of labor productivity, plotting the level around the staffs estimate of trend.  As noted in the first bullet in the middle left panel, in some earlier recessionssuch as those that started in 1973 
and in 1981labor productivity was pro-cyclical.  That is, labor productivity fell below trend during the recessionlikely reflecting some labor hoardingand then rose fairly quickly thereafter.  During the 1990 recession this pattern was barely evident, while it was not observed at all during the 2001 recession.  In the current episode, shown in the top right with a magnified scale, we expect that labor productivity will exhibit a mild pro-cyclical pattern.  With this recession anticipated to be quite deep, we expect many businesses to find that deeper job cuts would require shedding core personnel, leading to some labor hoarding in the near term.  Later this year, firms in recovering sectors expand production without initially adding to payrolls. Accordingly, job losses in the private sector continue in the second half, and the unemployment rate (the black line in the middle right panel) rises further.  Given the additional near-term weakness in our outlook for activity, the 
unemployment rate now is expected to peak at 8 percent early next year, a bit higher than in the last Greenbook. This slack in resource utilization puts considerable downward pressure on inflation.  In addition, the sharp drop in energy prices (the bottom left panel), along with declines in import and commodity prices, also restrains our forecast of core inflation. As shown to the right on line 3 in the table, we project 
        that these factors will push core PCE inflation down to 1 percent this year and to 0.8 percent next year. With the decline in energy prices, total PCE inflation (line 1) dips a little below core this year but then rises a little above core next year as energy prices increase a bit. Shifting gears, exhibit 9 reprises material from the pre-FOMC briefing that Bob Tetlow delivered yesterday; it takes a closer look at an unconventional policy action included as an alternative simulation in the Greenbook.  As you know, in our baseline scenario, the zero lower bound constraint on the federal funds rate is binding until 2013. This constraint partly explains our pessimistic baseline forecasts for unemployment and inflation, which are shown as the black lines in the panels at the top of the exhibit. We can demonstrate the implications of the lower-bound constraint for the economic outlook using an unconstrained optimal control simulation, much like the one you saw in the December Bluebook, which would 
prescribe lowering the funds rate to about negative 4 percent by the end of this year.  The effects of such a monetary policy, if it were feasible, are shown by the green lines in the panels. As you can see in the top left panel, by 2011 the unemployment rate 
would be more than 1 percentage point below the baseline path, and the top right panel shows that inflation would be  percentage point above baseline at that point. A large-scale asset purchase programor LSAP program, for shortof mortgage-backed securities and longer-term Treasury securities is one of a variety of the unconventional monetary policies that could, in principle, combat this problem.  The efficacy of such a program depends on several assumptions, summarized in the 
middle left panel.  First, these assets must be imperfect substitutes for short-term debtan assumption most economists would find reasonable; otherwise, actions intended to affect their returns could be undone through arbitrage with short-term securities. Second, Treasury bonds and MBS must remain good substitutes for other types of long-term debt, as they are thought to be under normal conditions, so that reductions in yields on the targeted securities spill over to other private interest rates.  Third, movements in long-term rates should ideally continue to favorably influence stock prices, the exchange rate, and other financial markets, thereby boosting the programs stimulative effect.  As noted in the middle right panel, the LSAP program we used for the alternative simulation assumes purchasing $500 billion in Treasury 
securities as well as further purchases of $500 billion in agency MBS beyond those 
already announced.  These purchases are assumed to be carried out over the next year and a half and are eventually unwound over 2012 and 2013.  As indicated by the next 
set of bullets, we assume that these purchases reduce various long-term interest rates between 75 and 125 basis points over the next few months; these estimated effects are consistent with the analysis in the notes completed in December that dealt with 
various zero lower bound issues. Using these estimates, the macroeconomic effects of the program are shown by the red lines in the panels at the top.  According to the FRB/US model, the unemployment rate follows a path only modestly above the theoretical unconstrained optimum, and inflation is closer to the unconstrained trajectory. Moreover, the federal funds rate (not shown) rises above the lower bound at the beginning of 2012, one year earlier than in the baseline projection. 
          The potential benefits of this particular LSAP program notwithstanding, some important caveats are laid out in the bottom panel.  On the financial end, the direct interest rate effects of the program are highly uncertain, if only because we have so little experience with this sort of program.  Second, the current dysfunction in some financial markets could limit the magnitude of indirect effectsthat is, the spillovers into markets other than those in which purchase activity takes place.  Third, the size 
of the program may be subject to economiesor dis-economiesof scale.  Fourth, LSAP programs, and unconventional policies more generally, introduce tricky exit issues regarding how to unwind the program without disrupting markets, incurring large losses on the Federal Reserves portfolio, or sparking a longer-run inflation problem.  Regarding macroeconomic issues, with credit availability so constrained at the moment and uncertainty so high, the model may understateor overstatethe size of the response of consumption and investment to changes in financial conditions of a given magnitude. In addition, possible heavy reliance on mortgage rates and housing to drive economic recovery entails some risks, particularly if spillovers from mortgage rates into other asset prices are limited.  All told, as this discussion makes 
clear, some significant potential benefits and costs need to be weighed when considering the possible implementation of large-scale asset purchase programs.  Trevor will now continue the presentation. MR. REEVE. As shown in the top left panel of your first international exhibit, equity prices in the advanced foreign and emerging-market economies have turned 
down over the past couple of weeks amid very gloomy economic indicators and intensified concerns about financial institutions.  Bank stock prices, in the next panel, 
have been especially hard hit. As Trish and Spence noted earlier, strains in interbank funding markets have eased on balance since your last meeting, despite deepening concerns about the banking sector.  As shown in the middle left panel, three-month LIBOROIS spreads have continued their gradual descent.  Demand for dollar funding abroad appears to have eased following the turn of the year, as evidenced by recent declines in outstanding draws from central bank liquidity swap facilities.  With a good chunk of these swaps currently having an original maturity of three months, it will take some time for these draws to roll off even if funding pressures ease further. In foreign exchange markets (the bottom panels), the dollar dropped sharply following the December cut in the federal funds rate target.  But since that time, as it has become increasingly clear that deteriorating conditions would lead foreign central banks also to ease policy further, the dollar has reversed course and has appreciated slightly on net over the intermeeting period.  As shown in the bottom right, we continue to project a modest depreciation of the dollar over the next couple of years, but this reverses only a little of the late-2008 appreciation. The table at the top of your next exhibit summarizes our outlook for foreign growth. As shown on line 1, we estimate that total foreign GDP contracted at a pace of 3 percent in the fourth quarter, the weakest quarterly reading in our thirty-eightyear history of this series. We expect foreign output to fall sharply again in the 
   current quarter.  These figures are considerably weaker than in the December projection, as incoming data, which we had expected to be grim, nonetheless surprised us on the downside. We continue to project foreign GDP to stabilize toward the middle of the year and then to begin to recover as financial conditions gradually improve, fiscal and monetary stimulus supports activity, and the U.S. economy regains its footing.  Of course, there are downside risks to this view, and data received in the past few days suggest that we may make additional downward revisions to our near-term outlook. One of the most striking recent developments has been the very sharp drop in global manufacturing and international trade, as shown by the plummeting purchasing managers indexes in the middle left panel.  As manufacturing is pro-cyclical, steep declines in output and trade should be expected given the broader downturn.  That said, for many countries the recent movements 
have been breathtaking. The Japanese economy has been particularly hard hit.  As shown in the middle right panel, real exports have plummeted with the decline in foreign demand and the appreciation of the yen. Real household spending, while far from a source of strength, has held up better. As shown on line 4 of the table, we estimate that Japanese GDP contracted at a 5 percent pace in the fourth quarter and expect that 
GDP will keep shrinking until late this year.  The euro area (line 5) is not faring much better, with GDP contracting at a 2 percent pace in the fourth and first quarters.  As shown on the bottom left, industrial production in the euro area, as elsewhere, has fallen sharply. Retail sales have slumped but have not collapsed.  The emerging Asian economies (line 9) are taking a severe beating, with output contracting at a 6 percent pace in the fourth quarter amid widespread declines in exports.  Real GDP in Korea and Singapore (not shown) plunged 21 percent and 16 percent, respectively, and growth in China (line 10) came to a standstill.  As indicated in the bottom right panel, continued strength in Chinese retail sales has countered some of the weakness in external demand, but growth in industrial production has fallen considerably.  With Chinese authorities taking strong measures to support the economy, we see growth strengthening in the quarters ahead but remaining well below the 10 percent average 
over the past decade. The weakness in the U.S. and foreign economies has shown through to U.S. trade flows, the subject of your next exhibit. As shown by the green line in the first panel, our exports have dropped sharply.  Imports, however, have dropped even more, leading to a marked narrowing of the trade deficit in November, as indicated to the right. Much of this narrowing is attributable to the value of oil imports, which has plummeted with the fall in oil prices.  As shown on the middle left, imports have also been held down by the decline in motor vehicle sales, which has led to a sharp slide in automotive imports.  Although we expect overall imports and exports to continue to fall in the current quarter (as indicated by the dots), the drop in exports is tempered somewhat by a projected rebound in aircraft exports.  As shown in the middle right, 
last autumns strike at Boeing and subsequent production delays resulted in a notable drop in aircraft exports, which should be reversed.  As shown on line 1 of the table, we estimate that real exports plummeted at a 20 percent pace in the fourth quarter, a 
   much steeper rate of decline than previously projected and a very sharp reversal from the strong performance seen earlier in the year.  Our markdown to real import growth has been nearly as large, resulting in a contribution of net exports to GDP (line 3) that is down only about  percentage point in the fourth quarter from our December projection, bringing it close to zero.  We see trade continuing to contract in the current quarter; but with the fall in imports exceeding that for exports, the net contribution is projected to be positive. Thereafter, however, the contribution of net exports turns negative. Your next exhibit provides some historical context for this projection.  As shown by the red line in the top panel, the downturn in foreign growth that we anticipate is similar in magnitude to the 1982 and 2001 episodes but is somewhat more persistent.  As shown by the solid red bars in the middle panel, exports subtracted about 1 percentage point from U.S. GDP growth in 1982 and 2001.  Thus far in the current episode, however, the contribution of exports to GDP is less negative, as the plunge in exports at the end of last year followed robust growth in previous quarters.  One key difference in the current recession is the real value of the dollar.  As shown in the bottom panel, the dollar was relatively strong and on an upward trajectory heading into the 1982 and 2001 downturns, providing additional restraint to exports.  Leading into the recent period, in contrast, the dollar was notably weaker and thus provided a boost to exports.  But with the dollar recently taking back some of its previous decline and with foreign demand remaining depressed, exports are projected to decline again this year, marking the first two-year consecutive decline in 50 years. Your next exhibit turns to commodity prices.  As shown in the first panel, oil and other commodity prices have plunged from their July peaks.  These dramatic movements have led some observers to conclude that speculators played a key role in these price dynamics, particularly for oil. Evidence for this hypothesis, however, remains elusive.  As shown in the top right, the two main villains in this story, noncommercial traders (mainly hedge funds) and index investors, were reducing their exposure to crude oil over the first half of 2008, when oil prices were surging.  Over the past couple of months, noncommercial traders have rebuilt their positions, even as oil prices have continued to decline. Moreover, the pattern of observed inventories is not consistent with the speculation hypothesis.  As shown in the middle left, U.S. crude oil inventories declined well below typical levels as prices were rising and hit a low right as the oil price peaked. Since then, inventories have moved up sharply, reflecting the collapse in oil demand.  As shown to the right, the growth of world oil 
demand turned negative around the middle of last year.  Emerging-market demand decelerated sharply late in the year, leading to the biggest annual decline in global oil use since the early 1980s. In response to the downturn in demand, OPEC has 
announced several production cuts in an effort to support prices.  As indicated on the bottom left, OPEC production (the red line) moved lower in the second half of last year and will fall considerably further if the cartel complies with its January target.  These production cuts are unlikely to lead to a quick turnaround in oil prices given the large shock to demand.  But over time (as shown on the bottom right), lower production along with firming demand should contribute to higher oil prices, as 
                                                             3 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). reflected in futures market quotes and our projections.  Nonfuel commodity prices are also expected to move up going forward, albeit more slowly than oil prices. Commodity price fluctuations have been a key driver of broader price movements.  As shown in the top left panel of your next exhibit, we project consumer price inflation in the advanced foreign economies to continue to drop sharply from elevated levels, largely reflecting swings in food and energy prices, although increasing slack also plays a role.  As shown in the middle left, inflation excluding food and energy in the advanced foreign economies has moved in a much narrower range. At this point, the risks of a prolonged period of deflation appear small for these economies, with Japan being the clear exception.  As shown below, the central banks of the advanced foreign economies have cut policy rates sharply in recent months, and we expect a little additional easing going forward.  Inflationary pressures have also diminished sharply for the emerging Asian economies, as shown in the middle right.  For Latin America, however, inflation has remained elevated, partly as 
a result of currency depreciation. Consequently, monetary authorities have been reluctant to ease policy while inflation concerns persist.  Within the past two weeks, however, both Brazil and Mexico have begun to lower policy rates, and we expect additional easing in the coming months.  Brian will now continue our presentation. MR. MADIGAN.3  I will be referring to the separate package labeled Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants Economic Projections.  Exhibit 1 depicts the central tendencies and ranges of your current forecasts for 2009 to 2011 and over the longer run, following the integrated approach to the inclusion of longer-run 
projections that was recommended by the Subcommittee on Communications and discussed at the December FOMC meeting. The likely severity of the current recession is clearly evident in this exhibit:  Nearly all of you expect real GDP to shrink this year, the unemployment rate to climb to at least 8 percent by the fourth quarter, and total PCE inflation to be less than 1 percent on a fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter basis. This figure also highlights your expectations that a period of three years is likely to be insufficient for the economy to return to a balanced-growth 
path following the current economic shock.  Indeed, although the benchmark horizon 
for the longer-run projections was specified as about five to six years, several of you 
noted that the convergence process might well take even longer than that. Exhibit 2 tabulates the central tendencies and ranges of your latest projections; corresponding information about the Committees previous projectionsthose from last Octoberis indicated in italics, and Greenbook projections are included as a memo item.  As shown in the left column of the top panel, your forecasts for real GDP growth in 2009 have a central tendency of minus 1 to minus  percent, as most of you expect output to contract further during the first half of this yearat an annual rate of about 3 to 4 percentbefore resuming positive growth, albeit at a low 
rate, during the second half. Moreover, you generally anticipate a relatively sluggish recovery that reflects the gradual waning of financial stresses, continued weakness in the housing sector, and poor growth prospects abroad.  As a result, most of you see 
       GDP growth as only gradually reaching a faster pace that eventually brings the economy back to its balanced-growth path.  Nearly all of you estimate that real GDP will grow over the longer run (the right-hand column) at an annual rate of 2 to 2 percent. The central tendency of these longer-run growth projections is the same as for the trial run that was conducted last October. As shown in the second panel, your forecasts of the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2009 fall in a range of 8 to 9 percent, more than a percentage point higher than for the projections that you made last October.  In explaining these revisions to your near-term outlook, many of you pointed to the weakness of incoming data on consumer spending and labor market conditions and to the rapid slowdown in global economic activity.  Your unemployment projections further ahead also underscore the anticipated slow pace of recovery:  Most of you expect that, even in 2011, the unemployment rate will be about 6 to 7 percent, well above your estimates of about 4 to 5 percent for the unemployment rate that will prevail over the longer run in the absence of further shocks.  Your longer-run projections for the unemployment rate have the same central tendency as in October. Your forecasts for inflation in 2009 have also shifted markedly since last October.  Your forecasts for overall PCE inflation in 2009 (the first column of the third panel) now have a central tendency of 0.3 to 1 percent, a full percentage point lower than the central tendency of your October projections; and most of you now expect a core PCE inflation rate of about 1 percent this year (the first column of the bottom panel), compared with the central tendency of 1 to 2 percent for your October projections. Looking further ahead, the width of the central tendencies and ranges of your inflation projections has increased considerably.  For example, the range of your overall PCE inflation projections for 2011 spans an interval of nearly 2 percentage pointsabout twice as wide as the range of your projections last October.  From your accompanying narratives, it is evident that these differences reflect the diversity of your views about the pace of economic recovery, the sensitivity of inflation to economic activity, the prevalence of downward nominal wage rigidity, and the degree to which you see longer-run inflation expectations as likely to remain firmly anchored over the next several years.  Many of you anticipate that inflation in 2011 will still be well below your individual assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation ratethat is, the longer-run rate of inflation that each of you sees as most consistent with the Federal Reserves dual mandate for promoting price stability and maximum 
employment.  Your assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate have a central tendency of about 1 to 2 percent and a range of 1 to 2 percent.  This central tendency is noticeably higher than in October; at that time, your assessments were tightly clustered around a value of 1 percent, whereas 2 percent is now the median and the mode of the distribution. In your forecast submissions, many of you indicated that your views regarding the appropriate path of monetary policy are roughly similar to those of the Greenbook, which assumes that the federal funds rate will remain close to the zero bound through 
             late 2012. However, a number of you noted that policy tightening would commence somewhat sooner than that, and a couple of you expressed the view that the federal funds rate will need to be raised substantially above current levels during the second half of this year. Exhibit 3 presents your views on the risks and uncertainties in the outlook.  As shown in the top left-hand panel, all of you see uncertainty about growth as elevated relative to historical norms; and as shown to the right, most of you continue to perceive the risks to growth as weighted to the downside, even with the downward revision in your modal projections.  In the accompanying narratives, many of you 
emphasized the uncertainties in gauging the evolution and implications of the global financial turmoil, the effects of nontraditional monetary policy tools, and the size and 
effect of the fiscal stimulus package.As shown in the bottom left-hand panel, nearly all of you see an elevated degree of uncertainty about the inflation outlook. As shown to the right, a majority view the risks to that outlook as roughly balanced, whereas the rest of you see the risks as tilted to the downside. Some of you noted that the degree of uncertainty about the inflation outlook reflects uncertainty about the evolution of resource slack and the path of commodity prices, which are highly sensitive to global economic conditions.Others mentioned that the risks to the inflation outlook could eventually become tilted
to the upside if stimulative policy measures are not unwound in a timely fashion once 
the economy begins to recover. As you know, your agenda reserves time for a decision tomorrow as to whether to proceed with regular publication of longer-run projections.  You may wish to indicate your general views on that issue in the economic go-round. As usual, the staff will be preparing a Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) and will be circulating drafts to you over the next few weeks along with drafts of the minutes.  Should you decide to proceed with longer-term projections, these projections from this cycle would be included in the SEP to be released along with the minutes of this meeting in mid-
February. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Do we have questions for the staff? President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I have a few questions, two really short onesjust clarifying onesand two longer ones. On the presentation, I have a question on exhibit 7, the recovery across different recessions. I note that you say you started it at the second quarter of 08 as being the trough. Everything else starts that at the NBER trough, which would have been the fourth quarter of 07. Why did you do that and not do it elsewhere? Is there any reason for it? 
  MR. SICHEL. You could do these types of cyclical comparison charts either way, dating from the NBER peak or dating from the series-specific peak.  What is done here is to index to the series-specific peak so that you look at each of the path cycles and say when GDP turned down in that cycle. In many cycles, that is the same as the NBER peak, but in some cycles it is not.  In this cycle, in particular, it came a couple of quarters later.  You could do it the other wayin which case you would see the red line rising first and then coming down.  It is just a different way of presenting the same information. MR. PLOSSER. I was just curious what the rationale for using that peak in some cases, but in other parts of the presentation you used the fourth quarter. MR. SICHEL. Arguably, it really just comes down to that it is a different way of presenting the same information.  You get a cleaner comparison because every business cycle has some unique features and the timing differs in some particular ways.  This is trying to abstract from those differences in timing.  But one could do it the other way. MR. PLOSSER. The second clarifying questionIm curious about tightening standards on consumer loans, particularly credit cards, in exhibit 4.  When you asked a banker in the survey about tightening credit card lending, how am I supposed to interpret that? Does that mean that they have reduced physically or technically the credit limits on credit cards? Does it mean that they are offering fewer credit cards? MS. DYNAN. Brian can correct me if I am wrong, but I believe it is more the latter offering fewer credit cards. MR. PLOSSER. It has been great that I get much fewer requests to apply for credit cards. [Laughter] 
   MS. DYNAN. We have asked separately about what they are doing to credit lines.  In fact, more than half are saying that they are reducing credit lines as well. MR. PLOSSER. I guess the issue there for me is, if they are reducing excess credit linesfor example, on credit cards that were not being exercised anywayor just not offering as many cards, how I interpret that in terms of really tightening credit is a bit loose there compared with some other things.  So I just wanted some clarification. Now, I have two more-substantive questions.  First, about inflation forecasting:  The best way I can describe forecasting in this environment is guesswork, and certainly my staff and I have struggled with the inflation forecast. In a lot of models, the approach to inflation forecasting both depends on and is very sensitive to varying degrees of incorporating forward-looking expectations and how much looking backward you do.  In this environment, when you have big swings up and down in inflation, looking backward may or may not be very helpful or very good. It also depends a lot on how much credibility you think the central bank has.  It is further complicated because we are at the zero bound, and that is difficult to incorporate into the models. So I would like a little discussion from you about how you came up with your forecast for inflation in this modelhow much of the path that you got is really dependent on the model because, frankly, it is really hard to figure out what to do, given all those things I just mentioned. MR. SICHEL. So I share your pain. [Laughter]  Regarding how we put this together, we are not looking at any particular model.  We are looking at a range of models and trying to make the best judgment that we can about how the various forces that affect inflation are likely to come into play over the next couple of years.  In terms of frameworks, we look at some pretty standard, backward-looking models that do not have any forward-looking components, just traditional measures of resource slack.  We also look at some forward-looking models in which 
  we incorporate various measures of inflation expectations to try to avail ourselves of the information in some of the survey-based measures of inflation expectations that have a more forward looking component. In terms of the factors that are particularly important for this contour, the very large amount of resource slack shown in that picture as captured by the unemployment ratealthough one could measure that in many waysis one important feature in the considerable slowdown of inflation. We think that a lot of slack will be putting downward pressure on wages and prices.  Then we add to that the movements in energy and other commodities and materials prices and the movements in import prices, which have all been quite dramatic recently in the direction of pushing inflation down. We think that all those things in terms of the forward-looking component are also going to be weighing on inflation expectations and that, as businesses and households in the economy see all of those factors and see headline inflation numbers coming down, inflation expectations themselves will be coming down some.  So we do the best we can with a range of models and try to bring the best judgment we can, and this is where we land. MR. PLOSSER. Okay. I think it is very difficult MR. STOCKTON. The thing that we are having the greatest difficulty with is trying to think about the evolution of inflation expectations in this current environment, in which monetary policy has the fed funds rate pinned at zero, and that shows through in other places.  In this forecast, we are assuming that, because actual inflation is going to run as low as it is for the reasons that Dan said, there will be some downdrift in inflation expectations.  That is implicit in 
this forecast, maybe on the order of  percentage point over the next few years.  We are uncertain enough about that that we obviously wanted to show some alternative simulations because a reasonable case could be made that, in fact, we are not going to get as much downdrift 
   in inflation expectations as we have implicitly built into this forecast.  We showed a simulation with anchored expectations running at about 2 percent, and I could see that.  Even though we have already entered a period of extreme weakness, as we showed in the briefing yesterday, the Michigan survey, with 5-to-10-year-ahead inflation expectations, has not really shown any discernible movement yet.  We might have expected that we would already have seen that if the effect was going to be large. On the other hand, just taking a look at historical evidence on sacrifice ratios would suggest a great deal more disinflation than we have built into this forecast.  If you just used average sacrifice ratios of 4, you would come up with something similar to what we had in the deflation scenario that we showed.  Though I am skeptical about that particular sort of pure backward-looking model, I do not think you could write off the possibility that, given that we think we are going to be in an extended period of extreme weakness with large output gaps and declining price pressures coming from commodities and oil, you could see a more significant movement in inflation expectations and even lower inflation.  So we are struggling with all of the exact issues that you laid out. This is our best guess at this point. MR. PLOSSER. So just two observations about that.  One is that we spent a lot of the past year, as we had the run-up in headline inflation due to oil on the upside, and most of us 
stressed the importance of anchored expectations and believed that expectations remained fairly well anchored. Consistent with that ongoing view, my outlook looked more like your anchored inflation expectations framework. I guess Id also just comment that a lot of the empirical evidence on, let me call it, the new-Keynesian Phillips curves with output gaps suggests that the sensitivity of inflation to some of those gap measures is certainly not as large as the sacrifice ratio of 4 that you would put in. So I think there might be reason to diminish that effect, 
  particularly if you thought, as we have discussed before, that some of these shocks might, in fact, be shocks where you actually have a new, lower equilibrium.  So the gap is maybe not as large as it appears to be. MR. STOCKTON. Just to be clear:  In our forecast, we are assuming a much flatter Phillips curve than has been the traditionally estimated one and a higher sacrifice ratio. MR. PLOSSER. My last question is about fiscal stimulus and your estimates there.  It is hard not to read the commentary, and there is a huge debate going on about the effects of stimulus.  Look at the empirical evidence, the theoretical evidencethe empirical work by Blanchard, and Valerie Rameys stuff, and you have Christina Romers work on the different estimates of multipliers and all that sort of stuff.  And I was curious. In the discussion, you highlighted two pieces in particular:  The first was the consumer tax cut and the debates about whether or not that is going to be saved or spent, and the second one, which I thought was somewhat more interesting, was that you thought that the business tax cuts would not have much effect. I guess I had two questions about that.  One, my reading of the empirical evidence is that those business tax cuts often do have some very short run stimulative effects, but the empirical evidence also says that large spending increases oftentimes have a negative effect on business investment.  That is where the substitution comes from.  So I just would like a little insight in terms of the model or the assessment of the pieces of this stimulus and how it plays into what youre assuming about some of those multipliers and so forth. MR. SICHEL. To pick up on the business side of that firstwe looked at the experience from the 200204 business tax cuts, and our best reading of that was that we just did not see much effect. In terms of the empirical work that we did, we just dont think that there is a big kick there, perhaps particularly in a period when many businesses are in tough times and taking 
 losses. It just may not be enough or the right kind of thing to get them to start investing.  So our reading of the evidence is that on the business side there just will not be much. MR. PLOSSER. If that is true, it would suggest that the other relevant piece of evidence for this is that, if large increases in expenditures as opposed to tax cuts act as a negative on business investment, as some of the empirical evidence suggests, your forecast for business investment may be worse than what you have in your modelor not? MR. SICHEL. I guess that channel would come through a user-cost effect on large expenditures and so on pushing up interest rates and generating crowding-out through that sort of a channel. We do have a modest increase in Treasury rates in this forecast for a variety of reasons, but we also have quite a dramatic decrease in, say, Baa bond rates and those spreads coming in during this period, when we think, as the macro risk diminishes, we are going to see some declines in credit spreads.  I think that decline in credit spreads going forward is likely to more than offset whatever forces there might be from the kind of expenditure-based crowding-out. On the household side, we are looking at the proposed tax cuts as being permanent.  We are treating them as permanent tax cuts, so we are treating those the way that we would typically treat a change in income in the usual model.  We have a marginal propensity to consume of about 0.7. We have some lags by which about 60 percent of the spending that is going to happen happens in the first year and about 85 percent by the end of the second year, and we are doing a pretty standard sort of analysis there with the types of numbers that we are getting. MR. PLOSSER. Well, the key is that you were treating them as permanent. 
MR. SICHEL. Yes. 
MR. PLOSSER. That answers the question there. 
  MR. SICHEL. We are interpreting this proposal as a down payment on a permanent change. MR. PLOSSER. Okay. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for the staff?  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. I am comparing exhibit 3 with exhibit 6 here.  In exhibit 3 you have the middle panel on the right, Overvaluation of Single-Family Homes, and in exhibit 6, the 
middle right panel, you have Prices of Commercial Properties.  On exhibit 3, I guess this is a judgment call:  a reduction in home values of about 25 percentam I reading this right?from where they are now. MS. DYNAN. You have to remember that rents are also rising in this calculation.  But just in terms of the price component, we have seen a decline of about 15 percent so far, and we are going to see another 15 percent. MR. BULLARD. Another 15 percent on homes. MS. DYNAN. That is right. MR. BULLARD. So I have done pictures like this, too, because I think it shows that the bubble part is out, and whatever else is remaining is overreaction, which is what you are saying. MS. DYNAN. That is consistent with our view, yes. 
MR. BULLARD. But on commercial properties and then in exhibit 6, you have maybe a different story, a more moderated downturn there, if I am reading this right. MS. DYNAN. Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. Is there a reason that we should think commercial properties are not as susceptible to the overcorrection as housing is? 
  MS. DYNAN. We do not have a modelor we have not really found a robust model for overvaluation of commercial property, so it has been more difficult to analyze formally.  But more generally, the reason we think that there will be such a large overcorrection on the residential side is that, with our forecast for the huge numbers of foreclosures, we think we are going to see a lot of supply dumped on the market and that it will perhaps lead sellers to aggressively cut prices. So far that has not happened in the commercial area, although we certainly think it is a risk.  We agree with President Yellens view that, depending on what 
happens in the CMBS market, it could be something that would happen.  But your reading is correctwe are not foreseeing a massive overcorrection on the commercial side at this point. MR. BULLARD. Okay. I guess I will interpret that as there might be some downside risk in this area.   MS. DYNAN. For sure. 
MR. BULLARD. On the assessment of fiscal policy, what is the effect of the deficit program on longer-term Treasury rates? MR. STOCKTON. That is a hard question to answer with any precision, but here goes.  We have implicit in this forecast a rise in the ratio of federal debt to GDP of about 15 percentage points over the next two or three years.  You may recall that there was a whole cottage industry several years ago trying to estimate the effects on long-term interest rates of that.  One study done by Glenn Hubbard and Eric Engen, one done by Thomas Laubach, and Im forgetting the third one now, but they all came up with effects.  Some were in the range of 2 to 3 basis points per percentage point. If you used those estimates to get a rough idea of how much you might be holding up Treasury yields from what they otherwise would be, you would get something between  and  percentage point. I am not really sure in the current circumstances how 
 relevant some of that empirical evidence is, in that we dont think we are going to be in a situation where there will, as Dan noted, be very much crowding-out because the output gap is so large over this period. It is not quite as though the federal government is going to be competing with the private sector for the resources.  There are going to be a lot of slack resources available, in our estimate of the output gap. MR. BULLARD. Is that a global output gap or just the United States? MR. STOCKTON.  Just the United States.  I am not sure whether I would venture a guess as high as the upper end of that range, but clearly we are starting to hear some stories about Treasury yields being affected by anticipation of a very significant rise in debt here. MR. BULLARD. Okay. I just have one more thing.  It is exhibit 9, which is An Unconventional Policy. We have two graphs at the top, on the unemployment rate and core PCE prices. I guess I would interpret these to say that, if you were serious about putting confidence bounds around these estimates, you probably could not tell these apart statistically.  Do you think that is a fair assessment, or are they more tightly estimated than that? MR. SICHEL. If you look at the picture in Part 1 of the Greenbook, we have some confidence bands based on Greenbook errors. If you compare the large-scale asset purchases line in that picture with the baseline, the large-scale asset purchases line is near the edge of the 70 percent confidence interval. So they are different.  [Laughter]  It is important to acknowledge that there is a tremendous amount of uncertainty, particularly in thinking about these types of programs and the effect of these types of programs.  If you think about all the steps as you go through the exercise of trying to gauge what the effect of these programs is and you go through all the steps of the purchase of securitieswhat is the effect on interest rates in the market where 
  the securities are purchased; what is the spillover to other markets; and then in this environment, what are the implications for economic outcomes?there are many places to be very uncertain. MR. BULLARD. So there is a lot of additional uncertainty that may not be properly captured in those confidence bounds? Is that what you are saying? MR. SICHEL. Well, the confidence bounds are based on a draw of errors over the past 20-plus years. That may not correctly capture the environment that we are in now. MR. STOCKTON. I think we can safely say that the confidence intervals are wide here, I think wider than we show in those estimates, probably wider than you can get on a legal size piece of paper.  [Laughter] We start out with our normal simulations that have all of the uncertainty about the shocks to the economy and even about the structure of the model of the economy.  These simulations have the tremendous added uncertainty of what these purchase programs will actually do to private interest rates, and as the note that was circulated to the Committee indicated, there is just a lot of uncertainty about how any particular program would affect mortgage rates, Treasury rates, the Baa rate.  We are doing our best here.  In some sense, this was a response to a question that you posed last time:  What would it take to fill the gap between the unconstrained and the baseline forecasts?  But I think it is extremely uncertain. MR. BULLARD. We didnt get lines that went like this or where it would have a huge effect but it would be very bad for other elements of the economy or something like that.  We did not really get that.  We got things that are close to baseline. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We are doing Bayesian decision analysis and not classical hypothesis testing here. That is a very different proposition.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. I decided to withdraw my question. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. 
 MR. STERN. I want to get back to commercial real estate for a second.  As I recall, we had a very significant correction in commercial real estate in the late 80s, early 90s.  I wonder if you have looked at what you are anticipating for the next couple of years relative to that experience and whether it was similar, more severe, less severe, or whatever. MS. DYNAN. Actually, at this point, the rise in delinquency rates is MR. STERN. You are going to get some help from Steve. MS. DYNAN. Thank you. 
MR. OLINER. I am just going to add a few words.  I think we are expecting problems in that sector that will not be as severe as the downturn in the late 80s and the early 90s in large part because we did not have the massive amount of overbuilding in this cycle that we had then.  
It is true that we have had a tremendous drop in demand for space, but we are coming into this cycle in a much better supply position. MR. STERN. Okay. Thanks. The second question:  Did you calculate an implicit fiscal multiplier for the next couple of years?  If so, what is it? MR. SICHEL. We did.  Those numbers are hard to interpret, but we did a calculation. MR. PLOSSER. I tried to get an answer on that, and they would not give it.  Maybe they will answer it for you. MR. SICHEL. In the sorts of calculations we talked about of figuring out what the impulse is, we have a multiplier of about 1.3. MR. STERN. One point three. 
MR. SICHEL. Yes. If you compare that with others, though, it is very important to be careful because those multiplier calculations include all sorts of different things.  What are you assuming is endogenous or exogenous?  What other things move, and when you do that 
 calculation, what of those things that move are you including or not including? So we think that is very much in the range of the numbers that other analysts looking at this type of program are using. We do not think we are doing anything particularly different there.  You might see a number that looks different, but if you dig under the surface and you do an apples-to-apples comparison, I think we are very much in the range of what others are doing there. MR. STERN. Okay. Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It depends on the composition of the programs, too. MR. SICHEL. Absolutely. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Real quick, a domestic question and an international question.  The domestic question, which is just a data question:  What do we expect the Treasury issuance to be in fiscal year 2009?  The numbers I have seen go up to $2 trillion. MR. SICHEL. We are projecting a deficit for fiscal 2009 of about $1.8 trillion. MR. FISHER. But my question is new issuance. 
MR. SICHEL. I do not have those numbers. 
MR. STOCKTON. We have an answer to that question, but I do not have it right in front of me. MR. FISHER. Could you get it to me sometime? 
MR. STOCKTON.  Absolutely. 
MR. FISHER. On the international sidemaybe this is a question for NathanI am curious. As I understand it, the Exchequer has given the Bank of England permission to purchase outright high-quality corporate bonds.  I presume that they have had the same kind of discussion that we have had about moral hazard, how far they want to go, which securities they 
  wish to purchase, and so on. I was thinking about that looking at this table in exhibit 11 and the United Kingdoms predicament, but do you know who has some insight into that decision and how perverse or how wise it is? MR. SHEETS. I think it is fair to say that, of the major central banks, the Bank of England has been particularly concerned about the moral hazard sorts of issues and has moved into these kinds of programs with great reluctance.  The major feature that I see of this announcement by the Bank of England is that now they can purchase outright stuff that they were taking only as collateral. My understanding is that this program is limited to AAA-rated assets, and I dont see them taking on as a result of this a huge amount, or really any, credit risk under their balance sheet. So I interpreted this as a relative modest step down the road toward balance sheet expansion. Thats my reading of it.  We can look at it again more carefully and see if we have different views at that point. The U.K. program more generally had some really aggressive features that didnt involve the Bank of England. For instance, the government is now going to be guaranteeing the asset side of the balance sheet as well as the liabilities side of the balance sheet for institutions and those sorts of things that were part of the announcement.  But I saw the Bank of England step as 
more incremental, rather than some sort of significant quantum shift in the orientation of their policy. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Im looking at exhibit 9.  I note that the program involved half MBS, half Treasury and that mortgage rates fell 125 basis points and Baa rates fell 75.  What if it was 
 all Treasury?  What would the fall in mortgage rates be, and what would the fall in the Baa rates be?  Would the effect on growth be larger or smaller? MR. SICHEL. I can tell you a little about that.  We did unpack the simulation and think about what if it was just $500 billion in MBS. What does that look like? What if it was just $500 billion in Treasuries?  What does that look like?  It is very important to highlight the uncertainties that Dave Stockton just mentioned with these estimates being incredibly uncertain.  We are trying to do something consistent with what was in those zero lower bound notes, but boy, there is a lot of tough stuff going on. So when we do that and we think about a $500 billion Treasury package, we would see Treasuries coming down about 50 basis points and Baa yields and mortgage rates coming down about 30 basis points.  The assumption there is that you get a hit on Treasuries and then a somewhat smaller spillover into other markets. MR. LACKER. Did you say 30 for both mortgage rates and Baa? MR. SICHEL. Yes, and there is no great science here.  It is looking at correlations of rates and how these rates have moved historically and so on.  If you look just at MBS, you find that you would get a bigger effect on mortgage rates, maybe something on the order of 90 basis points on mortgage rates, 50 on Baa, and maybe 30 on Treasuries.  Then when we take all of that and we run it through FRB/US and think about $500 billion of this and $500 billion of that, what are the output effects?  In FRB/US, the output effects are pretty similar for those two programs.  Now, there are many channels through which these programs would affect the economy that are not captured in FRB/US. One could make very plausible arguments for why, in fact, those two effects might not be the same, so let me just leave it there. MR. LACKER. When you say same, you mean at the aggregate level. MR. SICHEL. At the aggregate level, right. 
  MR. LACKER. Presumably the fraction that is houses is different. MR. SICHEL. Oh, yes. But if you look at what the change is in the unemployment rate relative to the baseline, it is about the same. MR. LACKER. The composition is different. MR. SICHEL. Right, the composition is different. 
MR. LACKER. So this implies that, if you did $1 trillion in Treasuries, the Baa rate would be lower. MR. SICHEL. What is the comparison that you are doing? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. He is multiplying by two. 
MR. SICHEL. Yes, and then comparing it is lower than what? 
MR. LACKER. I guess the 75. I guess I am confused.  I seethe Treasuries have a smaller overall multiplier.  It is like 30.  So it would be just 30.  So it would just be 60 on that 
and 60 on the MR. SICHEL. These numbers are very rough. I feel like I am being tortured, giving these out here. [Laughter] They are very rough. MR. LACKER. Two more questions. One for Brian.  In exhibit 6, the projections, bottom panel, longer-run inflation forecast, the dotted line is our October projections, and the solid lines are our January projections. If our intent was to find an inflation number that we all report that had some stability from forecast to forecast, we seem to have failed. MR. MADIGAN. Well, it could be that the Committees views have changed in the last several months. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You mean, for examterm inflation expectations? 
  MR. MADIGAN. Exactly. MR. LACKER. So one interpretation is that the implicit longer-run inflation objective of the Committee has changed over this quarter. MR. MADIGAN. And one plausible reason for that is that the Committee is now experiencing the actuality of a very large negative demand shock and maybe it now believes that 
it needs a larger inflation buffer than it previously thought would be best. MR. LACKER. But this exact variability is what led us to be unhappy with the third year of the forecast mechanism for revealing an implicit inflation target. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It could go the other way.  You could say that the trouble with the fixed target is that it doesnt allow for knowledge to accumulate.  I mean, there really has been another deflation scare, and it may affect our views. MR. LACKER. Okay. Well, well discuss this more.  One final thing. I think I saw Governor Duke try to intervene during the conversation about the responses to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, which was something I was discussing with Governor Kohn a minute ago. You know, when I think about what people say about credit constraints, the idea of a consumer with given characteristicsFICO score, income, and everythingwith GDP growth 
of plus 3 versus GDP growth of minus 5, the identical consumer is going to be riskier in the second situation. If a bank is not willing to lend in the second situation and is willing to lend in the first situation, I assert that they would say they are tightening their standards.  I would also assert that it does not seem like a credit-channel, credit-constraint type of thing, as you might otherwise think. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It would be interesting to compare the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey over different cycles, for example. 
    MR. LACKER. Right, it would, but I was going to ask Governor Duke because she is probably actually MS. DUKE. I will speak for myself.  When bankers talk about credit terms, that is typically going to be something like the credit score, the debt-to-income ratio, or some metric of underwriting with the most obvious example being GMACs announcement right after becoming a bank holding company that they were going to reduce their minimum credit score from somewhere in the low 700s to somewhere in the mid-600s, which would obviously mean that they would approve a larger number of applications.  Sometimes a change in terms is done to reduce the number of accounts or the volume; sometimes its done to increase the quality. A couple of things are going on. Right now you have the same consumers credit metrics deteriorating very rapidly. So even if you did not change the metrics you were using, you would still approve a much smaller proportion of the applications.  So that is going on.  The other thing I will be interested to see the next time we do this survey is that the banks are feeling a tremendous amount of political pressure on their lending.  I am not sure that they want to report that they have tightened their terms for consumer lending or even particularly that they are going to change those terms.  So I think we might see some pretty drastic reports of at least not tightening terms on consumer lending in the next survey. MR. LACKER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Seeing no other questions, why dont we adjourn for today, and we will begin tomorrow the first thing9:00 a.m.with the go-round.  There is a reception across the way and dinner. [Meeting recessed] 
 January 28, 2009Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  On the announcement of the extension of our various programs, we have had additional communication with the European Central Bank, and they are well disposed toward extending the swap arrangement.  But it turns out that they need a few more days to get formal approval from the Governing Council.  Their proposal is that we announce next Tuesday morning so that they can get the approval on Monday. We have had some discussions about communication strategy, and the view appears to be that putting all of our programs in one announcement is probably the best way to go because 
otherwise you create questions about why this and not that.  So although it puts some pressure on our confidentiality and all the other things, I think the planand I would be happy to take comments or advicewould be to hold off until next Tuesday morning to announce both the 
swap extensions and the credit programs that we voted on yesterday. President Plosser, we did inquire about the AMLF and had some discussionstalked with President Rosengren and his staff. The view is that there are some complications and difficulties with ending it in a peremptory way.  We will continue to discuss that, but we think for the moment we should not cancel it immediately.  President Rosengren, would you like to comment on that? MR. ROSENGREN. Yes. As I said yesterday, I talked to the money market funds.  They do think that the backup facility, while they hope they dont have to use it, has been serving a different purpose from some of the other facilities.  There is some concern that, if we were to announce the closure, we would get inundated with asset-backed commercial paper right before we closed down the facility. And the money market funds would have to do other things to try to 
 remain more liquid, so we might create issues that we are not trying to create at this time.  So I would be in favor of extending it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. With the understanding that we will continue to look at all these programs and review them and that we always have the option to restructure and rationalize what we do. Any thoughts or comments on the communication issue? All right. If not, it is time for the economic go-round, and we will start with President Lockhart.  MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In Atlanta, we just completed a full cycle of our Branch board meetings and the Atlanta board discussions, as well as quite a number of pre-FOMC calls. No surprise, sentiment about the economy continues to worsen as more parties are feeling the effect of the downturn. Fallout from financial market stress and the contracting economy continues to spread and is affecting sectors previously thought to be insulatedfor example, hospitals and universities.  Consumer retrenchment has significantly affected restaurants, the travel industry, and a wide variety of personal services.  The anecdotes I am hearing on consumer behavior are quite colorful.  Describing the popular culture, one director said, It is cool not to spend.  A director who is a chief financial officer of a large national home-improvement retailer described the recent shifts in consumer purchases within their stores in the direction of paint (if I am out of work, I might as well paint those walls), snow blowers (no longer willing to pay for service in the snow belt), and zero-radius lawnmowers (not to mow ones lawn but to hire oneself out to mow others lawns).  Anecdotal feedback also supports the Greenbook view that house prices continue to feel downward pressure.  In some parts of the Sixth Districtfor example, South Florida and metro AtlantaI am advised that prices may yet decline another 10 to 20 percent over the year. 
 There is widespread frustration over the inability to make longer-term plans in such a highly uncertain environment.  This seems the case across the spectrum of economic actors, including banks, large and smaller businesses, and households.  Investment decisions are being indefinitely postponed. We are hearing from business and consumer borrowers that they cant get loans or that lending terms for new or existing loans have tightened to an extent that they perceive as unreasonable. Bankers are telling me that there is little loan demand from qualified borrowers. Our S&R examiners noted a migration to asset-collateralized secured loan structures 
for previously unsecured cash flow-based C&I loans. Prompted by the question that we sent out in advance, much of the discussion at our recent board meeting centered on Fed communication strategy and execution.  Atlanta directors were uniform in their call for intensified and simplified communication aimed at the general public to treat confusion, anxiety, and a deficit of confidence.  Saying much the same thing, 
financial market contacts emphasized the heightened importance at this time of a clear and credible framework and plan for improving financial conditions and the avoidance of the appearance of one-off emergency policies.  This theme reflects a context of deep concerns about the financial sector in general and some very large institutions in particular.   Turning to the national economy and my forecast, the broad strokes of my forecast havent changed materially since October.  Then I was, on balance, rather pessimistic, and I remain skeptical of a more V-shaped recovery developing in the second half of 2009 and 2010, as projected in the Greenbook. Now, I acknowledge that the Greenbook narrative used the words gradually strengthening, but it did depict 2 percent growth in the second half and 2 percent next year. In contrast, I continue to anticipate a flatter, more protracted, L-shaped recovery moving through 2011.  It is my sense that the rebuildingor rearchitecting, to use 
 Governor Warshs termof the financial system and the rebuilding of business and household balance sheets will take a long time, restraining growth in the process. Similar to the more financial stress alternative scenario, I think the dysfunction in the ordinary channels of credit intermediation is likely to linger; and as in the more cautious spending alternative, I think rates of business and household saving could rise significantly and remain elevated after the recovery takes hold.  One Wall Street firm calls this their frugal future hypothesis. One of my financial contacts argued that the context of any recovery would be one of working through structural issues that are deep and wide.  The referenced structural issues include the balance of saving versus consumption, with the obvious implication for consumer demand. The potential for a longer period of more-intractable disinflation could obviously complicate progress toward recovery, and this possibility weighs heavily on my assessment of the risks we face. Also, I find it hard to think of an appropriate policy that anticipates core PCE inflation remaining under 1 percent through 2013, as in the Greenbook forecast.  Again, of course, the Greenbook forecast is not conditioned on appropriate policy.  I have, therefore, conditioned my assumption about the path of policy on adequately addressing the risk of further unwelcome disinflation that threatens deflation.  My longer-run outlook, assuming no further adverse shocks, has inflation returning to a 2 percent trend, and my growth projection converging to a 2 percent potential. Let me add that I support the subcommitteeterm forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, since the last FOMC meeting, our Districts economy has continued to weaken, and this weakness is widespread and is taking on more of the complexion 
  of the national economy.  Led by a sharp decline in manufacturing and slower export growth, year-over-year private employment growth slipped into negative territory in November for the first time in our region since 04.  Consumer spending weakened in December despite heavy discounting, and residential real estate activity remains quite depressed.  Conditions in commercial real estate have deteriorated markedly, and financing in this sector has become extremely difficult.  I might add a footnote here:  In discussions of this with some of the folks involved in commercial real estate, they are concerned about a couple of years from now because in 2002, 2003, and 2004 there were a lot of commercial real estate projects put into play at very low cap rates and very good interest rates, with a 10-year balloon. So those are all turning now with obviously less value because they are assuming that the cap rates will be higher.  They are also assuming that the buildings will not be as new, and therefore the values will be under 
pressure. So they feel that the problems in commercial real estate are only beginning. Those parts of the District that depend on energy and agriculture continue to be somewhat better, but these areas are expected to showand are, in fact, showingdeclines, and we expect pretty sharp declines in 09 due to the falloff in commodity prices.  District businesses are moving rapidly to address the sharp slowdown.  Many have instituted hiring and wage freezes, and layoffs have risen considerably.  Many businesses have significantly curtailed current production and future capital spending plans.  For example, our energy industry contacts expect a 30 to 50 percent reduction in drilling activity and a 35 to 60 percent reduction in capital expenditures in 09. The fiscal situation for states and local governments has also deteriorated very rapidly.  Most District states are now looking at significant budget shortfalls over the next two years.  Most states plan to address these deficits through spending reductions rather than tax increases.  
The situation for local governments is somewhat mixed, depending on whether they rely on property taxes or on sales taxes for the revenue base.  Many states and localities are looking for assistance from the federal stimulus package to avoid more draconian cutbacks in spending.  Banking conditions are deteriorating within the region.  Nonperforming loans are increasing, and losses are mounting as well. Turning to the national economy, recent economic data have been worse than expected, leading me, like others, to revise down the forecast for growth this year.  I now think we could see negative growth into the third quarter before the economy picks up as the fiscal stimulus begins to take hold later. In the near term, I see considerable downside risk to growth due to the pervasive weakness in the U.S. and foreign economies and the substantial financial headwinds that remain in place.  Indeed, I fully expect banking conditions to deteriorate further, even as financial markets begin to stabilize.  I am especially concerned that commercial real estate, as I mentioned earlier, could be the next shoe to drop, with broad implications for banks and insurance companies across the country.  Consequently, the strength and the timing of the recovery appear, obviously, very uncertain at this point. In terms of inflation, the significant decline in energy and commodity prices, along with a weaker economy, has obviously put considerable downward pressure on overall and core inflation, as a cyclical effect of this recession.  I think it would not necessarily be timely to start projecting deflationary pressures, and although I get more questions about that, at this point I dont consider that the highest risk we have. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like everybodys District, our District has slowed and continues to look very weak.  The business outlook survey actually rose a little last 
   month, but it is still measured deeply in recessionary territory.  Our banks continue to lendto households, in particular. They have cut back on commercial lending, and credit quality continues to deteriorate across all loan categories in the District.  Housing sales are down, but prices have not fallen to the degree that they have in some parts of the country, probably on averagethe declines have been more modest.  And the housing problems are not quite as bad as in some parts of the nation, but everything has deteriorated.  So, basically, in the Third District, the current economy and its outlook look largely like those of the nation as a whole, and all indications are that this recession will certainly be one of the worst in the postwar period. There are lots of reasons for doom and gloom.  As we have just heard, there are lots of reasons that we think that this recession and this weakness will continue, perhaps for some time to come.  But somebody has to take a somewhat more optimistic viewjust to make the 
distribution complete, if for no other reason, right? [Laughter] I think there are common 
elements to many business cycles.  I also find that one thing people have focused on a lot regarding the press and other things is that business sentiment, consumer confidence, and how people feel about the future appear to be very sensitive in this particular phase of the cycle.  Those things are pretty gloomy right now, but I would suggest that many economic cycles do have some commonalities, and one of those commonalities that often appearnot every time, but oftenis that sentiment can turn around very quickly and it can change for reasons that sometimes we dont understand or cant easily predict. It is also true that financial markets can move very quickly in various directions.  We have seen them move very quickly to the bad.  Once markets begin to heal, they could move very quickly in the other direction. So for the sake of optimism, I think there is still a possibility that at some pointmaybe not in the first half of this year and maybe not even in the second, but 
    there is still the hopethings could turn fairly quickly.  I am not basing a lot on that, but I do feel somewhat more optimistic than a lot of peopleincluding my staff, by the way.  They forced me to say that they take no responsibility for this, [laughter] and so I am letting them completely off the hook. MR. HOENIG. They disowned you. MR. PLOSSER. They have disowned me.  They have had it.  I do anticipate the growth path to look somewhat like that in the Greenbook.  But I am basically a little more optimistic than they area very weak first half, maybe some positive growth in the second half, which may just balance each other out, but that may be an optimistic perspective.  I expect the economy to gain some steam in 2010, to about 3 percent, and settle into something closer to a steady state or at least to a long-run trend in 2011.  I have less overshooting in my forecast than some of the 
models doand I think than the Greenbookbecause, as I explained yesterday, I have less of an 
output gap than they do. I think some of the productivity shock on financial intermediation is showing up in less of a gap, and therefore there is less of a closure and pushback on the other side. Unemployment rates will clearly rise this year above 8 percent, but I hope that by the end of the year they will begin to stabilize or perhaps come down a bit. On fiscal policy, as I was asking the staff yesterday, I am not very optimistic that the fiscal package will do much for the economy.  A multiplier of 1.3 is probably pretty optimistic, from my perspective.  So I havent built in much effect from fiscal stimulus.  I hope the fiscal package is constructed to give its best shot at helping, but I am not entirely optimistic about what its shape will actually look like or whether it will actually be very much help. Obviously, because I am on the more optimistic side, the risks to my forecasts are clearly to the downside. My inflation forecast is less deflationary than the Greenbooks baseline, and it 
is similar, as I said yesterday, to the alternative simulation labeled anchored inflation expectations. In that sense, I am relying more on forward-looking expectational models than on 
distributed lags of past inflation, which heavily affect both the output gap and the forecast of 
inflation going forward, given the wild swings in relative prices that we have seen.  I think more in terms of estimated new-Keynesian Phillips curves, in which the output gaps both are smaller and have less effect on inflation.  Again, those lead me to a little less dire scenario in terms of the 
deflationary pressure of output gaps going forward.  I put a lot more weight on our credibility for keeping inflation near 2 percent than on the past behavior of prices.  There is some risk to this inflation forecast, as I alluded to. Near term, we will not see much inflation.  I am not concerned about that. Nor do I think that deflation is going to be very persistent.  Some of it is already in train because of the way oil prices are behaving.  I do think that, in the longer term, there are inflation risks unless we manage our balance sheet appropriately.  I am encouraged by our discussion yesterday and some of the language that we talked about in terms of thinking about how we manage that in a careful way. Finally, I would just repeat my requestI think it was at our January meeting on inflation targetingthat it would be useful in our forecast summaries actually to forecast and report out, as we do with other measures, our assumed policy paths that each of us are using for our 
projections. In the internal summary, you give a verbal description of people saying what their assumed policy path is.  But I do think that it would be useful to summarize those in terms of both ranges and central tendencies because, as we moveassuming that we can and doto a more explicit inflation-targeting regime, that range of central tendencies for the assumed policy paths should be added. I think it will both help for transparency reasons and help anchor expectations as to what we are doing, and that would be good.  So I would encourage us to 
   continue to pursue that effort, and, of course, I am in favor of the longer-term projections.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We are in the midst of a very deep and protracted downturn, and I have to squint really hard to see any light at the end of the tunnel.  It is a sad commentary that the one glimmer of light during this intermeeting period has been that economic developments have been roughly in line with our expectations.  In other words, we were braced for the bad news we received. For example, we had expected a dreadful holiday 
retail season, and that is precisely what we got.  One of my directors, the head of a national department store chain, reported that his company posted its worst season since it was founded in 1901. We had anticipated severe hemorrhaging in jobs and a sizable jump in the unemployment rate, and that, too, is what we got.  Many of my business contacts are reporting layoffs and wage freezes. One unpleasant surprise among the economic data was last weeks 15 percent drop in housing starts. The residential housing sector has now shrunk so much that the only real assurance that it will ever stabilize seems to be the fact that construction spending cannot go negative. This is just about the only zero lower bound that is working on our side.  [Laughter] Turning to financial markets, it is comforting that lending terms eased in a few markets, notably money and mortgage markets.  But equity markets continue to sink, and credit spreads 
remain breathtakingly large.  Another of my directors, the chairman of a large, well-known apparel company, reported that his company, which is rated BB, looked hard for additional financing and the best they could come up with was a loan rate of 18 percent.  We have also heard many reports concerning the tightening of trade credit.  Indeed, a particularly severe 
shortage of credit to finance international trade flows may conceivably help explain why both exports and imports are shrinking by abnormally large amounts relative to the decline in GDP. Looking ahead, I expect that, as in the Greenbook, high borrowing costs and the continuing credit crunch will help prolong the recession for at least a couple more quarters.  
Accordingly, I project that real GDP will decline  percent this year, and the unemployment rate will rise to 8 percent.  However, I am hopeful that a large and timely fiscal stimulus will help kick-start a recovery by the end of the year.  In particular, based partly on our situation in California, I think the Greenbooks assessment of the impetus provided by the proposed federal fiscal stimulus directed toward state and local governments is on the pessimistic side.  The Greenbook assumes that such spending will roll out slowly over the next several years, providing little near-term stimulus.  However, my contacts told me that in California a lack of funds has already halted construction on a number of public infrastructure projects, and these projects could be quickly restarted if federal funds help the state close its huge budget gap.  Outside California, the data suggest that most of the country is facing near-term cuts in state spending in areas ranging from education to construction, and it appears that the fiscal stimulus will allocate money largely to those states that could most use it to avoid immediate spending cuts and finance shovel-ready infrastructure projects.  Still, even with a large fiscal stimulus, it will take many years before the economy returns to potential and economic slack is eliminated. Unfortunately, over the intermeeting period, I have become much more pessimistic about the downside risk to my modal growth forecast owing to the rapidly deteriorating condition of the banking system.  For much of the past year, it was the financial sector that was constricting the real economy, but now the slowing economy is returning the favor.  The sharp decline in equity prices and increases in CDS spreads for bank holding companies since our last meeting 
 presumably reflect the markets concern about the likely magnitude of losses that will hit the banking sector. These losses now reflect a broad-based deterioration in performance across the whole spectrum of consumer and corporate lending.  As I mentioned yesterday, I share President Hoenigs concern about commercial real estate over the next few years.  I fear a cycle in which rising vacancies and falling valuations make it impossible for owners to refinance loans that will be coming due, leading to forced selling and intensifying downward price pressures.  Such a development may undermine the soundness of many regional and community banks, whose exposures to this asset class are substantial. Let me conclude with some discussion of the outlook for inflation, for which there are also sizable risks. I expect core PCE price inflation to come in at about 1 percent this year and then edge down a bit more in 2010 and 2011.  Given the sizable downside risks to the forecast 
for economic growth, the risks to inflation also appear tilted to the downside.  As in several of the Greenbook alternative scenarios, it is not hard to imagine a situation with excessive declines in inflation and a long-lasting deflationary trap, much like Japans experience and perhaps even complete with zombie banks.  Of course, I am reminded that the last time we were concerned 
about the possibility of deflation in 2003 we were head-faked. The deceleration in prices during that period was not sustained, and it was actually concentrated in a few categories of goods, particularly used cars with very flexible prices and owners equivalent rent. My staff has taken a first look at the current episode in order to see how widespread deflationary pressures are across various categories of goods and services.  Given the available data, they find in this preliminary look that the recent deflationary pressures are more prevalent now than during the 2003 deflationary scare.  Just as in 2003, some recent price declines are in categories of goods with highly flexible prices, like used cars and apparel, where price cuts could 
reflect a temporary response by retailers to sell off excess inventory.  However, disinflationary pressures are somewhat more prevalent now than in 2003 in categories of goods and services characterized by sticky prices.  We will be analyzing these data in greater depth going forward and monitoring them, but we think they raise the risk that we could see a prolonged period in which inflation falls well below the level consistent with our dual goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment.  That leads me, especially now, to favor going ahead with the publication of our longer-term projections, especially given that inflation over the next three years, our standard horizon, looks as though it is unlikely to converge to the levels that we think most desirable in the longer term.  I think it makes going ahead with the extended forecast particularly appropriate now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy is clearly in recession. There has been recent significant deterioration in labor markets.  The only comment I would have on that is that the pace of decline may be somewhat less rapid than in the nation as a whole. Other parts of the country appear to be deteriorating faster, but certainly the Eighth District is not immune, and anecdotal information from many, many sources suggests that credit market frictions continue to be a substantial drag on economic activity. In the national outlook, of course, we are in the midst of probably the worst of a sharp and significant downturn. For the shorter term, like 2009, I think the Greenbook assessment 
seems plausible.  Longer term, I dont think that the Greenbook assessment is plausible.  According to the Greenbook baseline, the federal funds rate remains at zero into 2013, even though, according to the table in Part 1, page 19, real GDP at that point will have grown at rates of 2.6 percent, 4.9 percent, and 5.3 percent for the previous three years, and we would still be 
 sitting at zero according to the forecast.  Unemployment would have dropped 300 basis points, and we still would not have moved.  That doesnt seem very plausible to me as a longer-term forecast. Core PCE inflation remains below 1 percent according to the baseline forecast.  So this strikes me as a little implausible, and I think it might color our thinking from a strategic perspective. It strikes me as implausible, especially if we pursue some reasonably aggressive quantitative policies. Then I would expect that that forecast would not materialize.  So one reading of the baseline forecast would be that, under current planning, the FOMC is not going to be aggressive enough to keep inflation at target over a reasonable time frame, like five years.  That is one way to look at it. To do that, you would have to be more aggressive with the quantitative policies. I am going to have more to say about that. Like President Yellen, I am concerned, as some of you know, about a deflationary trap, and I just want to stress here for a few minutes the global aspect of this.  We are not going to get any good news globally over the next six to nine months on the economy, anywhere.  A baseline assessment would be that this will force the Bank of England, the ECB, and the Bank of Canada to zero nominal interest rates.  They are saying maybe not, but I think that they will all be forced to zero. Of course, the Bank of Japan is at 10 basis points right now.  So you will have the G-7 economies all at zero.  Absolutely unprecedented.  That is a lot of time to be getting bad news on the economy worldwide.  That is why I am very concerned about deflationary expectations possibly taking hold, and I would regard expectations as being the main determinant of actual inflation. If that is what transpires, we will face many years in this deflationary trap outcome, 
and that will be a global outcome.  I am very concerned about that, and so I say the key near-term goal is just to avoid that outcome. 
  How can we do that?  Well, much of the analysis that we have remains in terms of the federal funds rate, and much of our own thinking around the table remains in terms of the federal funds rate as defining what monetary policy is.  If we are not planning to move off zero for five years, I think that we have to change our thinking and we need even greater focus on quantitative measures in future analysis.  Like it or not, we need to see our policy more in quantitative terms so that we can assess possible paths and what is going to be effective.  I am afraid that is going to mean talking more about the monetary base, monetary aggregates, reserves, and the balance sheet. The key thing is how much balance sheet expansion we can accomplish before we run into inflation troubles. There has to be some kind of answer to this.  Is it $1 trillionin which case we are already over and are in inflation danger?  $2 trillion? Maybe $5 trillion? Maybe $10 trillion? I dont know where that is right now, and I think we need some kind of quantitative assessment of that. We did get some of that in a simulation from the staffa $1 trillion outright purchase of Treasuries and MBS, with minor effects on inflation according to the baseline model.  That would suggest that we have a lot of room to maneuver.  I am sure that we could have a long debate about how accurate that is and everything, but that would suggest that we have a lot of 
room to maneuver, and we could be much more aggressive if we want to avoid this deflationary 
outcome, which is the real danger over the next twelve months.  So I see that as the key to our policy choices. Again, if it is not inflationary, then we can do a lot more.  If it is inflationaryif it is going to translate into inflationthen we have to be very careful about it.  But we need to get better metrics of where we are on that, and right now it just seems wide open. I am going to close with the mystery of the round numbers.  Proposed expansions of programs seem to come in suspiciously round numbers.  Some of them are like $500 billion; 
  another number is $250 billion.  Contrast this with the accuracy of the federal funds rate, where we will talk about small increments and out many years into the future.  This just shows how much we are used to thinking in terms of the fed funds rate, and we are used to doing the analysis in terms of the fed funds rate.  We have lots of mechanisms in place.  We have a lot of inexperience when we are thinking on the quantitative side, so we are very rough in our characterization. That is perfectly understandable, but we need to move more and quickly in that direction. It seems to me that we would like to think maybe in increments of $25 billion or maybe a little larger increment than that and then have some kind of quantitative assessment 
about why the numbers are what they are and what we think that they will do.  That will inform our choices going forward. When we have done quantitative policy in the past, it has often been in terms of growth rates.  You would think in terms of money, reserves, or whatever you wanted to think about, and you would talk about a certain pace of expansion, maybe moderating later in the future or something like that.  That seems like a very logical thing to do in this situation.  So those are some thoughts on the economy and on policy.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Plosser said he would take a more optimistic view to make the distribution complete.  I was going to say that I am going to take the opposite tack, but 
President Yellen pretty much summarized what I was about to say.  I do want to comment on my District, and second, I want to talk very briefly about microeconomic behavior based on my discussions with various CEOs around the country26 this time.  Mr. Chairman, you have the list of who they are outside my District. First, with regard to our District, like President Hoenigs, our two Districts, I believe, are the only ones that had positive employment growth last year.  In the Eleventh District, we 
   created 192,400 jobs, according to our adjusted data, all in the private sector.  That machine has stopped; in fact, we would have a straight line downward if we were to chart it.  Manufacturing, chemicals, commercial construction, energy, and transportation services have reported significant drops in demand.  Oil and gas prices have fallen, as I think we are all well aware.  The rig count has come down accordingly.  Just for clarification purposes, the oil and gas industry accounts for 10 percent of our employment; nonetheless, it is a significant factor.  Our high-tech industry is under pressure. I think anybody who read the newspaper saw Texas Instruments recent numbers.  They are reflective of what is going on in that sector.  Exports, which are important, have been particularly hit hard by declining growth in external markets.  We are the largest exporting state. Our exports have declinedinterestingly, because of the stronger dollar but also because of the weakness overseas that you mentioned, President Bullard.  Our largest industry in terms of employment, our medical industry, is suffering in terms of foreigners who come to be repaired in Houston, Dallas, and elsewhere. So our District, like President Hoenigs District, has now fallen into recession, and we are like everybody elsefor the most part (we still are Texans).  [Laughter] I will refrain this time around, Mr. Chairman, from referring to Rube Goldberg, Bennie and the Jets, and Elton John. But I do want to recall what I consider to be a prescient insight of James Madison, who said, The circulation of confidence is better than the circulation of money. When I speak to CEOs around the country, I would say that confidence is not just waning, it is in a freefall. It is leading me to conclude that, obviously, their behavior is becoming hard-over pro-cyclical, and the consequences are the kind of serious recessionary scenario that President Yellen pointed out and significantly higher deflationary risks. I think that negative outlook, particularly the outlook for deflation, is the 800-pound gorilla or, my having just come 
back from the Galapagos, the 800-pound blue-footed booby in the room.  And I dont think we should be shy to talk about it. Businesses are doing what they should be doingwhat you and I would do or what any woman or any man who runs a business would do under the circumstances.  They are aggressively cutting head count. One of the CEOs I talked to, who employs one of the largest workforces in the country, said he had three drawers.  In the one drawer he plans to cut 17,000 jobs, unannounced as yet; in a drawer to the right of that, a still higher number; and in a drawer to the right of that, a still higher number.  I asked about the drawers to the left, and he said, There are none. Even businesses that are well run and well capitalized are doing, again, what any businesswoman or businessman would do under the circumstances.  If they are in good shape, which are few, they are using this as a chance to cull out the kind of legacy middle management they have been waiting to get rid of for some time.  Therefore, the bias is to lower head counts. We saw pretty dramatic numbers announced one day or two days ago, and I think that is intensifying, not lessening. They are implementing pay and merit freezes. They are stretching out their payables. I dont know if this is public or not, but GE has gone around to their major suppliers and asked for forbearance on payablesGE, AAA-rated credit, whom we are assisting at this time.  They are aggressively pursuing their receivables, particularly the law firms and other service-sector firms.  They are running their plant and equipment at the lowest levels in some time.  TI is running its factories at 33 percent of capacity. The Eastman chemical plant in Tennessee is running at the lowest capacity utilization in over 100 years. You see this, again, across the board.  On the rails, there are 100,000 cars that are unutilized. And to go back to my favorite metric of the 70-foot-long lumber-carrying cars, there are 285 miles of unutilized cars of that nature across the rail industry.  Very critically, they 
are cutting back dramatically on cap-ex.  Not a single CEO I spoke to, from Disney to the large manufacturers, is doing anything but.  The least amount of cutback that I heard was 12 percent, and the average, I would say, is up to a third. So, in my view, the Greenbook base case has understated the effect of this dynamic.  My outlook is probably the most pessimistic of all of the Banks.  I am line number 8, for those of you who are guessing. We all know, by the way, who line number 18 is, because it says, New York says this; New York says that; New York says this.  [Laughter] Mr. Chairman, basically my conclusion is that the instrument panel we are usingand I say this with enormous respect for the people who do this wonderful work for usis almost inappropriate to the cockpit of the airplane that we are flying. You mentioned yesterday, Mr. Chairman, that we are dealing with these extraordinary circumstances.  I believe that the only way we can proceed is to be as deft as we possibly can be with the kind of programs that we put forward.  As concerned as I am about their long-term inflationary consequences, my concern right now is that we are underestimating the potential deflationary consequence to microeconomic behavior and the macroeconomic numbers that President Yellen mentioned. I would like to conclude with just a comment about the TARP.  Every banker I speak to who has taken money from the TARP regrets it.  They are hyper-negative.  They feel that they 
have been taken, in the words of a borrower of almost $3 billion from the TARP.  The rules are shifting. They are worried about government interference.  It is conditioning them to take actions that, again, are pro-cyclical in a perverse waydisincentivizing management and demoralizing the people who work for those firms. I dont know what we can do about that, but I am deeply concerned about this drumbeat now of negativism about the TARP and regret for 
having participated. Mr. Chairman, I will comment on policy later.  I thank you for including 
my suggestions in the reworded statements that we have, and I look forward to that debate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think greater clarity on the TARP and the bank rescue programs is essential, and it is obviously a very high priority for the Treasury and for the government.  I just want to comment that the animal spirit theory of the business cycle seems to be getting some resuscitation here.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will resist the temptation to mark down my forecast right now.  [Laughter] Conversations with my business contacts indicate that the economic contraction is proceeding with full force.  These discussions were very consistent with the near-term outlook of the Greenbook.  There were two noteworthy recurrent themes that I would like to elaborate onthe rapid pace of job destruction and the large uncertainties that private-sector decisionmakers face. With regard to job destruction, consistent with the national data, all CEOs I spoke with indicated that they are in the process of large-scale layoffs and are studying further job cuts.  Much as President Fisher referred to with his three drawers, I did not find a left drawer either.  The uniformity of these reports is striking. The best economic report I received was from John Deere that agriculture was still holding up well enough that they are going to do okay, they thought. They are cutting only hundreds of jobs.  Everybody else is cutting way more.  All of 
my contacts also say that the easy job eliminations have already been made or are in train.  Everyone is now contemplating making more-difficult cuts of valuable core staff.  These cutbacks, if they go through with them, will adversely influence firms ability to respond when we do eventually see the signs of economic recovery.  I could go on. I had a story about how 
  replacement garbage disposals are down 20 percent, which must mean that people are now washing dishes when their disposal breaks down. But I will stop. Anxiety is the second recurrent theme.  Uncertainty and risk aversion are inhibiting economic and financial activity.  Obviously, much of this reflects the inevitable uncertainty regarding the depth and persistence of the downturn.  But as President Lockhart mentioned, I am also hearing from all quarters that businesses cannot understand the rationale used to undertake government policy interventions.  It is not just businesses.  A political leader in Illinois, the Mayor of Chicago, whom I will quote, tells me that when he runs into homeowners in the city, a number of them have mentioned that they are wondering where their mortgage relief is coming from.  They are thinking about not paying their mortgage.  Without a clearer understanding of the rules of the game, they will be more cautious and sit on the sidelines, and they are clamoring 
for greater clarity. When I tried to ask my directors about what they preferred mostwe cant do more with the funds ratemore policy accommodation or more clarity, they clearly chose clarity over policy. Now, in spite of what I am going to say, I do support our current programs, but I am reporting on our environment and the challenges that we are facing here.   With regard to banks, relatively healthy banks that took TARP money are concerned that they will be subjected to future government restrictions.  Again, as President Fisher mentioned, I think there is some regret.  Many bankers who could have gotten by without TARP injections took the money because they feared that nonparticipation might be inferred as a signal of 
weakness. Now they are concerned that the costs could be considerably higher than advertised, in part because of political pressure for lending mandates in an economic environment that makes credit quality challenging. 
 Another uncertainty relates to the configuration of credit policies and potential changes in them.  I talked about this just briefly yesterday.  In many cases, our lending facilities and government guarantees restore funding sources to some parties but disadvantage others who are outside the safety net protection. For example, I have heard from several durable goods manufacturers who have captive finance companies that provide funding for dealers or customers.  Those who owned a bank or had previously utilized commercial paper funding thought that the CPFF and the Treasury guarantees have been helpful. But not everyone is in this position. According to those who were excluded, the separating equilibrium imposes higher costs on them than the previous pooling equilibrium, in which the high costs were shared more by all of them. Similarly, the TALF is expected to be very helpful to some but not others under the current plans. Though our lending programs have been helpful on balance, their differential effects, unfortunately, open us up to political risks.  It is difficult to do the costbenefit calculations at the moment, because the TALF hasnt gotten under way.  Once we see how well that is going, I think we will have a better idea of that. I also hear repeatedly that uncertainty is boosting lending rates and keeping capital sitting idle on the sidelines. Bankers I talked to who have balance sheet capacity are charging higher credit spreads. They all tell me that this change is a return to more normal and prudent 
consideration of risk and underwriting. So some of that could be what President Yellens borrowers are experiencing as well. In fact, in reading through the first report to the Congress of the Financial Stability Oversight Board, I saw many of these arguments mentioned there as well.  So everyone is obviously dealing with this issue. A private equity contact mentioned that he raised a fund of $5 billion this summerI think it was supposed to be higher than thatbut has not made a single investment yet.  Given 
 the scarcity of capital and the high level of risk, he says expected returns must be much higher than before. I wasnt expecting that. This obviously implies that capital injections from these private sources will be very expensive when they are finally deployed.  Furthermore, some are concerned that government actions are hard to predict and add to uncertainty.  They bring up what happened to WaMus debt holders.  One of our directors explicitly mentioned Governor Kohns testimony about our hopes for private capital injections alongside public injections.  I went back, and it is written very well, but no one could envision that happening without greater clarity on the rules guiding those interventions. All of these stories feed into our outlook for the national economy.  Our forecast for growth is very similar to the Greenbooks.  Although my gut instinct is now conditioned to reflexively mark down every forecast I see, cool-headed analysis suggests that risks are a bit more two-sided around pessimistic outlooks.  One reason is that the risks surrounding our expectations for growth over the next year or two depend a good deal on the effect of the fiscal stimulus.  I think in our forecast we have this helping a bit more than most around the table in the 
second half. Although I favor fiscal stimulus, I do continue to wonder about the effectiveness of such large programs and the ability to efficiently target large sums to the intended projects in a full and timely fashion.  Still, I thought we were a bit conservative in estimating their GDP effects, so the risks to growth over the next couple of years have some upside possibilities. Our inflation outlook is a bit more sanguine than the Greenbooks.  We see inflation falling only to about 1 percent in 2011.  We are on the high side.  Of course, resource gaps are expected to be very large and could pull inflation lower than in our forecast.  But predicting inflation expectations seems harder than usual right now.  Indeed, there is a remarkable diversity of views about where inflation is headed.  As many of my academic colleagues are quick to point 
  out, the substantial liquidity injections and large government deficits pose an important upside risk to the longer-run inflation outlook.  Not only have academics brought up the enormous liquidity and unpleasant monetarist arithmetic, but so have some of my directors and other business contacts. On the other hand, if agents expectations of inflation focus more heavily on the large resource gaps, we could face significant downside risks as well.  So there is a lot to balance out here. President Plosser and President Bullard mentioned this, too.  Even Dave Stockton sort of gave us a pass on the fact that we have a lot to chew through here as to what could be a reasonable argument.  It is hard to know where expectations balance out, but our base case is that inflation expectations will not decline as much as envisioned in the Greenbook.  I dont think this really changes the policy implications.  We still need the useful monetary policy accommodation that is really called for in this outlook.  Finally, I do support the long-term forecasts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish I could report some improvement in the outlook from my contacts, but sentiment in my District has not shifted.  Everyone is anticipating more bad news on the output front, and they are much less confident about when the turnaround is going to occur. Importantly, this is increasingly translating into reduced investment plans.  My business contacts who were previously uncertain about the outlook but had not yet reduced their planned investments now seem to be joining the tide of other businesses that are scaling back. Those who had already lowered their investment plans seem to be accelerating their reductions. I focused my conversations with my business contacts on investment decisions because it seems to be a critical factor separating the relatively optimistic private forecasters from the 
pessimists, and my contacts investment plans are keeping me very much in the pessimists camp.  I guess I am balancing out this end of the table.  In particular, I have revised down business fixed investment in my forecast.  I am now anticipating a steep decline of just over  20 percent in the second quarter, and this is the aspect of my forecast that changed the most during this intermeeting period.  I am now expecting to see a reduction in real GDP of  0.8 percent for 2009, the same as the Greenbook.  Potential growth in the medium term might be damped by some of these investment reductions, but I have not yet revised down my estimate for potential over the five-to-six-year period, which I put at 2.7 percent. I do see disinflation pressures continuing, and the gap remains elevated in my forecast.  But the pricing reports from my business contacts remain uncertain.  This uncertainty does not surprise me, given that the volatility we have seen in prices has been quite large.  But at this point, some people are just as worried about inflation as they are about deflation, despite the latest headline inflation data.  Obviously, they are looking at some of our longer-term policy decisions. Long-term inflation expectations in the Michigan surveys that we discussed yesterday, though, do not seem to be shifting either up or down yet.  Nevertheless, I do expect weak demand to gradually lower inflation rates to levels that are going to require further monetary policy actions. My projection reflects this.  But with inflation expectations in my projection unchanged, unlike the Greenbook, the decline in core inflation in my projection is less persistent than the Greenbook, and my outlook for core inflation in 2011 rises to 1.4 percent. In my view, our monetary policy needs to remain accommodative for a time to better insulate us from deflation and zero bound problems.  I am one of those participants who did change their perspective on the longer-term PCE inflation objective.  I had been in the 
   1 percent camp for some time, but because of my concern about deflation and zero bound problems, I have raised that longer-term projection to 2 percent for PCE inflation. It is difficult to feel very confident, as others have said today, about characterizing the balance of risks to the outlook in this extremely abnormal environment.  However, I cannot help but think that the risks to both economic growth and inflation are unbalanced to the downside.  Without data revealing some stability, it is hard to argue against more downside risks, as others have commented this morning.  Businesses are far more focused on survival than they are on new opportunities. On the inflation front, the stability of businesses and households inflation expectations, as we currently see them, may not remain, and so the downside risk to inflation remains. Regarding the longer-term projections, they were proposed by the subcommittee to help us with our communication with the public, and I have enthusiastically supported all of the recommendations and the steps in this direction.  I also support releasing our long-term projections from this meeting.  These projections should help the public solidify their expectations for economic performance, especially when our current troubles have abated.  I am also encouraged that there is strong agreement among the participants, as Brian reported yesterday, about our expectations for economic performance five to six years out.  So I think releasing them will be helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Anticipating for a moment the statement in the policy round, there is a proposed sentence that says that the Committee anticipates a gradual 
recovery later this year with downside risks.  I am listening to the discussion about near-term pessimism and concern and uncertainty, but then you mentioned your forecast of minus 0.8 percent for 2009, which arithmetically suggests that you do think there will be positive 
 economic growth later in the year, and I think many of the projections that we got were in the same general ballpark.  I just want to flag that as an issue for the next round, which is whether we are comfortable talking about positive growth later in the year or whether we think we should just remain agnostic on that.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like the Greenbook, the Boston Fed forecast has the unemployment rate well above the NAIRU and the inflation rate uncomfortably low throughout the forecast period.  Because our view is that inflation is more sensitive to significant excess capacity, our forecast implies an even greater risk of deflation than the Greenbooks forecast. Even with the substantial fiscal stimulus and recent monetary policy actions done to date, our outlook implies that it will take more than five years to return to full employment and an inflation rate of 2 percent or more. Housing continues to be a key component of the problems.  Falling housing prices reduce the wealth of consumers, contribute to problems at financial institutions, and provide little incentive for residential investment to improve and so are a significant contributing factor to our dire outlook.  Until housing starts stabilize, I am skeptical that equity prices will show the improvement embedded in the Greenbook forecast.  The rising unemployment rate will be 
placing further pressure on housing but will also be a contributing factor in weakening commercial real estate, which a number of people around the table have highlighted.  Commercial real estate has held up better in some locations, such as Boston, but even those locations are beginning to soften. With little credit available and vacancy rates climbing, my contacts with real estate developers have become increasingly depressing.  In Boston, commercial real estate has also been buoyed by building by hospitals, colleges, and universities.  
 However, losses experienced in endowments have caused the construction to be halted unless it was fully funded and already started. Banking continues to be stressed. Large banks are experiencing large losses in their investment portfolios as highly-rated securities continue to sell at very steep discounts, if they sell at all. They are also likely to experience substantial increases in loan-loss reserves, which appear to be lagging the problems.  The economy and financial markets remain susceptible to further bad news emanating from the banks.  Despite monetary and fiscal actions taken or likely to be taken soon, our forecast indicates that, without more-significant actions, unemployment rates will remain too high and inflation will remain too low for an uncomfortably long period of time. Regarding the long-term projections, I do support publishing those.  I would note, as President Pianalto did, that there does seem to be an increase as to where people are targeting inflation. It might be good to update some of the staff work that was done on what the probability of hitting the zero lower bound is and what the probability of deflation is. It does 
seem that our targets have been somewhat based on taste rather than focusing on the tails of the distribution. I think we have learned something about the tails of the distribution, and it might lead to a more informed discussion if we discussed in more depth what the probability is now that we have had some recent evidence of those two outcomes.  Thank you CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I think there is little question that the immediate prospects for the economy are negative.  It is going to contract in this quarter; certainly my guess is the second quarter and possibly into the third.  But in response to your question, I do think there will be beginnings of the recovery in the second half of the year, 
   precisely for the reasons spelled out in yesterdays presentation:  the dynamics of the inventory-adjustment process, a gradual further improvement in financial conditions, the ebbing of weakness in housing activity, and the consequences of stimulative policies, both monetary and fiscal. So I do think that there is a reasonable probabilityI guess this is going to make me the optimist at the tablethat something like the Greenbook forecast is going to be realized over that time frame. I know there is a lot of negative sentiment around right now and a lot of negative rhetoric.  You know, that is part and parcel of a recession.  I am not suggesting that we take a lot of comfort from that, but I do think we should keep it in perspective that it goes with every recession that I have observed.  They can say, Well, this time we really mean it, [laughter] but 
somebody gave me an article from Time magazine back in 1991, and they were describing that recession just like this one.  So we should try to bear that in mind. That said, of the alternative simulations, the one that really caught my attention was the more financial stress scenario.  I do think some risks are there.  They are associated mostly with uncertainty about programs and prospects.  I do think that the establishment and operation of an aggregator bank, assuming it is done effectively, would be a good idea.  I think it might even be advisable to go further than that, using the Swedish example, and close down some large, insolvent institutions. I realize that is probably very, very difficult and possibly risky, but the benefits could be very high as well in reducing the uncertainty that seems to be plaguing the financial sector and a good number of its customers.  Finally, I do support the release of the longer-term forecasts.  I think that they provide additional information of value and that they will help to anchor expectations. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill be very brief.  Our indicators and the anecdotal reports from the Fifth District are quite consistent with the national picture and the picture that emerges from the reports that we have heard around the table from the Reserve Bank Presidents so far today.  There are only three nuances that I would take note of.  One is recent declines in the wage indexes in the manufacturing and services areas in our Districtjust a couple of months of decline but potentially meaningful.  Second, on the other side, expected prices received in manufacturing have swung decisively from negative territory in November, more than minus 1 percent, to positive territory, above 1 percent.  Third, a fairly significant decline has occurred in the last two months in the index for expected capital spending in manufacturing. On the national level, our outlook is basically aligned with the Greenbook, with a couple of exceptions.  I am a bit more optimistic about the pace of growth when the recovery begins.  I expect inflation to return above 1 percent later this year and to get to about 1 percent rather than sag in the out years. I do not think we are going to want to keep the nominal rate at the floor for nearly as long as the Greenbook expects.  I am thinking liftoff is likely sometime in 2010 rather than in 2012. I endorse the statements made by Presidents Evans and Stern and others about the depressing effect of the lack of clarity around government credit policy.  Capital injections that have occurred so far and prospects for future capital injections seem to have induced a tipping dynamic by which we are at a corner solutionthere is no private equity coming in for fear of what future capital injections might do to them, and so we are left with the public sector being the only source of prospective capital. Looking ahead at the strategy, I think we want to get to a point where the banks are healthy, which means they can raise equity privately.  That transition 
 is the hard one to solve, and I endorse the ideas that President Stern just alluded to.  I would also say that I think public statements about our potential future credit programs and the expansion of our programs to asset classes could well be a drawback in that they add uncertainty about where we are going to come in next.  I will cede the rest of my time to my past self.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As noted around the table, the economy continues to contract at a rapid rate, and there are few signs that the pace of decline 
has slowed. That said, clearly there are some positive elements in aspects of financial conditions, such as interbank funding rates. Corporate bond and mortgage rates have eased somewhat since our last meeting.  Oil prices have fallen a lot over the last few months, and that has bolstered household real income.  Moreover, the political uncertainty about what is next 
should lessen now that the Obama Administration has assumed power.  Over the next few weeks, the Administration is likely to pass its fiscal program and announce how it plans to utilize the second tranche of TARP monies. That should lessen some of the uncertainty in financial markets about the public policy response. But these developments should not comfort us much, if at all.  In my view, the risks to the New York Fed forecast and the Greenbook forecast, which dont differ very much, remain 
very much to the downside, and we should emphasize that when we motivate our response to the crisis. In particular, in addition to the labor market woes already cited, the banking system is probably in worse shape today than it was last fall, despite the injection of hundreds of billions of dollars of government capital.  Moreover, the ability of the federal government to adequately recapitalize the banks as loan-loss provisions mount is in question, impaired by the question of whether the size of the second TARP tranche will be big enough to do the job.  A good portion 
   of this is going to be used for other areas, such as mortgage foreclosure mitigation, and there are exceedingly poor politics associated with giving more resources to aid the banks, making it problematic whether a third TARP installment, which might be needed, can actually be secured politically. Inadequate bank capital is at the core of our problems, and I am not sure we are going to be able to solve this problem quickly or definitively.  It would be much better to do too much in terms of capital injection, taking back that excess later, than being a day late and many billions of dollars short as we have often seemed to be throughout this financial crisis.  Adequate capital in the form of tangible common equity is essential to restore confidence, improve credit availability, and restore good market function. The second issue I would like to talk about is household net worth.  It is contracting at a rate exceeded only in the Great Depression.  We should not understate the size of the blow to U.S. households, for households wealth has been evaporating at an alarming rate at a time when the personal saving rate has been unusually low and the safety net had been whittled back.  That is not a good combination.  This is the first big economic downturn in which defined-contribution plans, which are immediately affected by changes in financial asset value, are the dominant source of retirement income for many households beyond Social Security.  In the past, defined-benefit plans with a fixed monthly payment insulated retirees and their families from 
changes in financial asset values.  Moreover, the decline in wealth may not be over.  Although I will not predict the equity market, the Greenbook forecast of a 12 percent annualized return over the next two years could turn out to be optimistic.  After all, if bank balance sheet constraints are causing risk premiums to be unusually high, couldnt this also translate into the risk premium for the U.S. equity market remaining high with lower equity prices at least over the near term?  
     Finally, even if equity prices do better, it certainly looks as though housing prices will continue to fall for another year or so, until housing inventories are brought down to more-normal levels. Third, the U.S. recession is occurring in the context of global weakness.  This means that the trade sector is not likely to provide any significant degree of support here or anywhere else.  I think this is very important, especially in the context of the staffs analysis of the Reinhart Rogoff consequences of past crises.  The staff forecast showed a lesser decline relative to past crises and what has happened historically. Yet in those past crises, individual countries had the out of depreciating their currencies and having trade improvement.  We do not have that out this time, and I think that just makes me a bit more nervous about whether our experience will be more in line with those historical experiences. I know the Greenbook and our own modal forecast assume that the recovery will begin in the second half of the year. I hope that is true.  But it strikes me that, until our banking system is repaired, the risks lie clearly to the downside of such a traditional-recovery, V-shaped forecast.  At a minimum, the degree of uncertainty about the outlook is unusually wide, as described in the Greenbook and illustrated by the width of our fan charts.  We are well outside the range of normal experience.  In such circumstances, model-based forecasts probably should be viewed with somewhat greater skepticism, and the Greenbook acknowledges that.  Under these 
circumstances, the Federal Reserve needs to continue to be aggressive in providing liquidity and balance sheet capacity to the private sector.  The goal should be to ease financial conditions as much as possible in the current environment, subject to the constraints imposed by our legal authority, subject to protecting ourselves against credit risk and the issues posed by further rapid balance sheet expansion on our exit from our current suite of special liquidity facilities. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
  MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I find myself within the central tendency of Committee projections, maybe including the Philadelphia staff in that central tendency.  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER. They will be pleased. MR. KOHN. But there is not much comfort in numbers, is there? I think I agree with everyone that data since the last meeting indicate that the steep decline in spending and production is ongoing. Employment and production have been cut back especially sharply as businesses are adjusting to the collapse in demand that we saw last fall by reducing inventories 
and head count very, very aggressively. Final demand is also continuing to contract.  Consumption, business equipment spending, and housing are all falling rapidly, and commercial construction is on the cusp of pulling back in a major way.  There is really no sign that the pace 
of decline in final demand is slowing. To some extent, the ongoing drop in final demand reflects the playing out of the downward shift in demand and the tightening of financial conditions that we saw last fall.  That is, we are seeing the kind of multiplieraccelerator effects that we saw before on consumption, working through declines in jobs and income, now on business capital spending, working through expectations of weaker sales going forward.  I think I saw an accelerator chart yesterday.  We are also feeling the lagged effects of tighter credit in the fourth quarter and sharp declines in equity and housing markets then.  Now, presumably these sorts of downward pressures on spending from past real and financial shocks would diminish over time, though it could be quite some time before they play out.  Unfortunately, I think that, on top of the playing out of those effects, there are some further new pressures on spending coming into play.  Further declines in prices of housing and 
 equity in the first quarter will weigh on consumption going forward, and equity prices were lower than what the Greenbook had assumed.  The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey suggests that the tightening of credit by banks is continuing, and I am sure that the mounting layoffs are increasing the fear of job loss and continuing to depress, if not depressing even further, consumer confidence and sparking pullbacks in spending.  We have also heard many reports this morning about businesses becoming much more cautious.  Finally, as the Chairman and others have remarked, the remarkable widespread decline in economic activity abroad is just holding down demand all over.  It is reducing our exports. No part of the world economy is providing support to global demand. Despite some signs of improvement, financial markets remain severely disrupted and fragile.  Outside the GSEs, securitization markets remain virtually shut down.  Credit to any but high-quality borrowers is still very expensive.  For example, the yield on BBB corporate bonds, which would cover the median business, is about 2 percentage points higher than it was in the first half of September.  That is a pretty sharp increase in the cost of capital.  I have been especially worried, as others have remarked, about some of the developments in the last few weeks, some sort of backsliding in markets.  We have seen a further drop in equity prices and a strengthening of the dollar pointing to somewhat firmer financial conditions at a time when we need financial conditions to be easier. The further evidence of the vulnerability of banks and other intermediaries has been especially concerning.  Losses by these guys were much larger than people anticipated, even people with pessimistic views.  CDS spreads have risen in response to the sizable drop in stock prices.  LIBOR has backed up again a bit. We have said all along that part of the adjustment to the new steady state in financial markets will involve more credit flowing through intermediaries and less through securities 
markets.  But intermediaries remain under substantial pressure to deleverage, shrink assets, and conserve capital and liquidity, and there are lots of losses to come even under the moderate recession scenario of the Greenbook. The staff estimates that there are about $1 trillion of losses coming from the third quarter on, with about half of those at U.S. banks and thrifts.  So there is much more pain to come.  In this environment, both perceptions of risk and aversion to risk will remain heightened.  Banks will be capital-constrained and worried about their survival, and credit will be tight for some time, even with a well-designed TARP that has taxpayers taking tail risks from lenders through capital insurance and asset purchases. Still, I do have a rebound in the second half of the year. I do not know exactly what quarter it will occur in, but I do think there is a reasonable hope.  That is my modal forecast, and I think it is reasonable. There are a couple of reasons for that part of it.  It depends on government actions.  This massive fiscal stimulus is one obvious thing, but I also think a well-designed support package for banks that does reduce uncertainty and builds capital and further Federal Reserve actions that work to ease financial conditions will at least help to stabilize markets and stop the continued erosion of credit availability and perhaps begin to turn things around with slow improvement.  I think that at least we can stabilize things. There are some natural market mechanisms in play as well that will help to bring the economy back.  The drop in energy prices is certainly building real incomes, and the fall in house prices and lower interest rates are increasing affordability and, I think, will ultimately spur purchases. I think demand curves do slope downward and to the right eventuallyat least that is what I learned in Economics 101.  [Laughter] I am waiting for it to work in the housing market.  The initial negative effects of that initial pullback in spending, the multiplieraccelerator effects, and the tightening of the fourth quarter will eventually fade.  Businesses did come into this 
 downdraft with inventories under good control, and their prompt responses in cutting production and employment mean that inventory and staffing levels will soon be comfortable even for very low levels of demand, and production and hiring can be raised promptly in line with demand. In my forecast the unemployment rate did get to 8 percent.  With that slack, inflation continues to drop, and even with long-run inflation expectations well anchored, I had total and core PCE in the 1 to 1 percent range in 201011, well below my objective of 2 percent.  I do think that risks remain to the downside, mainly from financial fragility and the possibility of 
tighter credit conditions, lower equity prices, steeper declines in house prices, et cetera.  It could take longer than I have assumed for the financial situation to stabilize.  In that environment, there is a riskand not a trivial riskof a deflationary spiral taking hold with even lower inflation expectations feeding high real interest rates with policy stuck at the lower bound. In that regard, I, like others, support proceeding with our long-run projections.  I think they will help to clarify where we want things to go in terms of inflation and could be especially useful in our communication about inflation when it seems to be getting below where we want it to go. They might help a little around the edge to anchor inflation expectations.  I would not expect a huge effect, but they could help a little when we really need it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 
MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin with financial markets before turning to the economy.  On financial markets, I will give a few points that I have described in my notes as tenuous improvements in market functioning, but I really think that I will describe them as feigning optimism.  So let me feign optimism with three points on financial markets. 
  First, bridge financings: We saw earlier this week a very large bridge financing to fund an acquisition. I would say that bridge financing by its very terms probably could not have come together 30 or 45 days ago. There are a couple of other very large deals being contemplated that require bridge financing, and I would say this bridge looks different from bridges of the last cycle. I would not call it a new equilibrium, but I would say that neither the acquirers nor the lenders/underwriters would have been prepared to agree to terms like this.  This is a bridge that is not very good. It is a bridge that gets expensive in a hurry.  It is a bridge that could give way.  But buyer, seller, and underwriter came to terms here; and whether or not this is a new equilibrium in funding transactions with some assurance that there will be cash for a period of time if the acquirer does not lose its rating, this and other factors suggest that at least there is a new negotiation happening. So I would say that it is a positive sign. Second, trading businesses: The firms that are left and that still have meaningful trading businesses had fantastic Januaries.  Why did they have such good Januaries? There is just not a lot of competition left.  Bid-asked spreads are wide.  A lot of volatility is now presumed to be 
built into the models and into traders behavior.  I would say that, if you are still in the trading business and you are looking for sources of profit and good news to get you through this cycle, some are there.  The capital intensity of these trading businesses is lower than it was before.  The necessity for firms to commit capital to be profitable in trading is lower.  So I would say, again, that this is some, tenuous, improvement and may be a new equilibrium there, which is good news 
for some of the survivors that are in trading. Third, and I think probably the most essential point, is about the prospects for large, internationally active financial institutions to raise capital.  There is a good chance that in the next week there will be a large non-U.S. internationally active financial institution that tests the 
 capital markets for a very large capital raise.  It is likely to be a rights offering.  It is likely to be at a very significant discount to its current share price, but I would guess that it gets done.  If it gets done, that says that there still is private capital at some price.  Maybe it is a price that existing shareholders dont like. Maybe it is a price that companies dont want.  But if those private markets are open for the relatively strong outside the United States, I would say that is encouraging and we need it. The last 30 capital raises by financial institutions arent just losers.  They are big losers, and it is hard for investors and others to be opportunistic when they see that track record.  So I think the success or failure of these financial institutions might well be tested 
in the next weekwhen we see a pretty good institution give it a real shot.  So thats my optimistic pitch.   Now words of caution: As Trish said yesterday, I think that we are back at maybe the most precarious state in financial markets that we have been at, at least in a regularly scheduled FOMC meeting, and I think that this is going to be an awfully consequential few weeks.  It is true that risk aversion has been reduced, but only a bit.  We have seen a bit of an unwind in the flight to quality and a bit of an unwind in the flight to the most liquid securities, but, boy, I would be hesitant to overstate the improvement here.  Even if we look at high-yield markets and we note that they are off their peaks, there are still expectations of defaults that are near Depression levels. I want to take comfort in some of these data, but I think it is probably just a bit of a bump from the darkest, scariest days that we had in the prior period. Second, I would note that share prices of large financial institutions broadly and regional financial institutions have all gotten crushed in 2009 so far, and that has raised real questions about the solvency and durability of their franchises as publicly held entities.  So the question remains:  How have credit markets seemed to improve along the lines that Trish and Bill have 
  mentioned, while we have had this huge markdown in the valuation of these companies? Again, as Trish noted yesterday, I think the answer is us, the Fed.  Sure, we have seen some improvements in markets that we havent been directly involved in, like A2/P2.  But the Feds facilities have been primary in support and have been a partial bulwark against broader financial institution weakness. So in some ways I use that to reconcile the discrepancy between improvements in market functioning, at least in the very short term, and the miserable news that we have had on broad financial institutions. Third, a note of caution and concern: There are still a lot of 50-cent dollars out there, and no one seems to want to buy them.  That these arbitrage opportunities are still available in markets that dont require great sophistication and that people are not taking them up should tell us that something is very, very wrong.  Only those buyers who have longer-term horizons, risk neutrality, and balance sheet capacity can participate in these markets, and those are criteria that are not found among most folks that could partake.  So these 50-cent dollars might be 60-cent dollars, but they are still out there, and that should be telling us that things are in pretty tough shape. Finally, and maybe of most concern about the state of financial markets, is the large and increasing number of financial institutions, including many that are most systemically important, that are perceived by markets to be effectively insolvent or nearly so.  Single-digit share prices for a large class of financial institutions do not strike me as a new equilibrium.  And to avoid the theological argument that we had a bit of yesterday on whether this is an equilibrium or 
disequilibrium, I will tell you that I do not think it is going to stick around for long.  If you think about these financial institutions that are trading at $3, $5, or $7, I am not sure I understand how they can continue to get through the next 12 months in that state.  I do not know how they can 
  run their businesses, how they can incentivize their employees, or how governance will hold with the specter of continued losses and possible nationalization.  My sense is that this is not a sustainable equilibrium, and I fear which way it breaks.  I think the specter of nationalization may delay public market recapitalization of many of these firms, though I expect that the new Administration will do all it can to provide clarity.  As the real economy continues to deteriorate, I suspect that it will take a couple of shots at this to get it right.  And this single-digit share price might well continue to limit the efficient provision of credit to the real economy and continue to hinder financial flows.  So I am skeptical in a tumultuous world that these single-digit share prices are sustainable for financial institutions, and, again, the way in which they are likely to break is pretty disturbing. So what does all of this mean for the real economy?  Others said it more extensively than I will, but the economy is in terrible shape.  Activity is falling fast with little indication of stabilization even at new lower levels.  As I think Dan described yesterday, the nature of this turmoil, which I define more as a breakdown of the global financial architecture than some housing-led recession, is likely to have a recovery period that is slower, bumpier, and tougher than most recent recessions would suggest.  As a result of all that, I am more negative on GDP and employment prospects than the Greenbook forecast is, in both the near term and the medium term. Mr. Chairman, with respect to your question about the second half, I think we should see, arithmetically and because of the inventory issue, a slowdown in weakness, but it does not look to me anything like a real recovery.  I am also skeptical of near-term GDP growth that is expected from the stimulus package.  I dont expect foreign economies to perform as well as the Greenbook says or to recover even as quickly as the United States will, as it no doubt ultimately 
  will. I expect net exports to be less supportive of GDP growth than the Greenbook suggests, and I read foreign exchange markets as being supportive of the view that advanced foreign economies will actually underperform the United States in the period ahead. A couple of final concerns before I turn to inflation.  In a world like this, where the model of capitalism that has come from the United States is now being doubtedmaybe even ridiculed in some corners of the worldthe risk of big policy errors everywhere, not just here but everywhere, is higher. The U.S. weakness in the story linethat somehow this started in the United States and this is the fault of the United Statesmakes it harder for us to stop bad policies from being undertaken outside the United States.  So with all of that, I am quite uncertain about the timing of improvement in financial conditions.  The decision on the use of TARP funding is thus likely to be critically important, and this solvency overhang is likely to be harmful to GDP in the balance of 2009. I think that the framing question for the new Administration should and might be what the official sector can do to help reopen capital markets so that real common equity that these institutions need can come to bear.  What sorts of risk insurance do we need to provide?  I am not sure how the real economy can get traction until some of those things are answered. Finally, on the inflation front, I will be brief.  The inflation picture, of course, bears watching, but I am still skeptical that deflation risks rank as high as many of the other risks that I and others have described today. Inflation expectations remain key and obviously should be a 
focus of our continued discussions here. On the long-term projections and the recommendation that comes from the subcommittee, I support it.  The benefits, at least in my view, will be felt more inside this room.  
I think it does help us communicate and understand one anothers views.  The idea that somehow 
 that is going to have anything more than a modest near-term effect on how the world thinks about inflation and thinks about our behavior probably overstates, but I do think it is, on balance, a step in the right direction.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In looking at the banks and talking to the bankers, I started with the fourth-quarter earnings announcements.  The first part is what they consider to be real, which is the higher loan-loss provisions.  In this, unemployment has led to an acceleration in delinquencies that goes across all consumer products.  The reduced activity in the cash flow of businesses has resulted in higher C&I delinquencies. Vacancy rates and the lack of takeout financing are creating problems in commercial real estate, but I am still not sure that is as big a problem as maybe it looks, certainly not as much as in residential, with the ability to renegotiate those loans and to continue the cash flow on them being better than it has been in residential.  Appraisals took another leg down, which has heightened loss severities. When you combine that with lengthening real estate marketing times, particularly for home equity loans, there is less willingness to buy through the first mortgage, and so the junior liens are becoming total loss rather than partial recoveries.  I would point out that the same pessimism about future conditions that drives the reserving also drives the underwriting conditions for future loans, and that is why they are continuing to tighten. Not so real in terms of the numbers that showed up in the fourth-quarter loss are the model losses and goodwill impairment in other than temporary impairment, particularly on trust preferred securities; there is something just deep in the DNA of bankers that they do not believe.  They are used to marks on credit, and they believe in marks on credit, but they do not believe in the marks based on market conditions.  So if you look at these securities, if they were accounted 
for as a troubled debt, they would be written down to 90.  If they are accounted for under market conditions, they are written down to somewhere between 30 and 50.  In the minds of the bankers, this is a portion of their capital that will return when ultimately their projections of future cash flows are proved to be correct, if they can live that long. The loan charge-offs would be tax deductible, but the security write-downs are not tax deductible. So when asking them about whether or not they would sell these securities at their current marks, only those who thought they might get some tax advantage would be willing to sell them at the current marks.  In terms of goodwill and these write-downs, I really had not focused on how the goodwill-impairment process works.  It is a two-step process, and it appears that now, if the current fair value of an acquisition does not equal the goodwill amountwhich means that the market conditions for bank equities are causing the goodwill to be written downthey are not really concerned about analysts because the analysts are, as we all know, focusing on tangible capital. But they are concerned about the headline risk as their customers and potential customers read about huge losses in the institutions.  Finally, mortgage-servicing rightsthe one negative consequence of lower rates is that the expected refinance then reduces the value of mortgage-servicing rights. A number of you have mentioned the TARP money.  In this case, there were several who were approved for capital but elected not to take it, much to the annoyance of the Treasury.  Their reasons were that their capital levels were high or adequate already.  They could not see the loan demand in the future and were concerned about additional conditions that might be imposed by the Congress.  Many of these had time to actually see the introduction of the Frank bill before they had to make a final decision, and that definitely informed the decision.  Their concerns are what you would expectthat lending quotas would be imposed and that would 
   actually increase their risk; that the dividend restrictions would make it more difficult for them ultimately to raise private equity; and that compensation restrictions would affect what they view as strategically important incentive plans.  So I do not think that any of them would be 
particularly inclined to take another voluntary program. With the smaller banks, the mutual and the subchapter S banks just saw a posting of the terms for them for CPP.  This process is taking a lot longer to work through all the different parts of the system than we might have realized.  Some have been approved but havent yet received their money.  Even on the TLGP, the FDIC temporary liquidity guarantee program, many of them are reporting that they are getting slow to no response from FDIC.  They were planning to use these guarantees for lines from upstream correspondents, and they are just not getting any answer. In terms of liquidity, all the banks are seeing good deposit growth.  However, some of this growth has to be viewed as temporary, given that there is a year-end expiration of the unlimited demand deposit insurance.  In normal times, you have a parking of risk-averse assets in bank deposits, and those can move out just as quickly as they came in.  Some are still concerned about additional funding, as well as the examiner expectations or the FDIC additional charges based on expanding nondeposit sources, such as Home Loan Bank advances or brokered funds. Some are holding large amounts of excess reserves as an actual or perceived cushion against funding sources pulling away, as well as a demonstration of both liquidity and capital strength. In lending, most of them do report weak loan demand, and those that are reporting stronger loan demand seem to be in markets in which the larger players are pulling back or are involved in mergers.  Those that are seeing loan growth dont initially even see the income boost from that as they have to establish initial reserves on the net growth.  To counteract the angry 
political climate, banks are actively highlighting in their press releases all of their new loan fundings, even the gross fundings.  Advertising for consumer and small business loans has improved application volume, but the quality is low, which leads to lower approval rates on all types of credit. In terms of construction lending, the projects that arent in trouble are simply finishing out the current phase and stopping, and this applies even vertically.  One banker reported a high-rise condo project that the builder just capped off at ten stories and decided that was the end of the project. There is a bit of lending to take over distressed projects of others.  There is significant deterioration in the creditworthiness of businesses and consumers, with at least one banker expressing concern about the predictive capability and the stability of credit scores in the current environment:  Businesses that are being affected by rapidly changing asset prices go from positive earnings through the third quarter to chapter 11 by the end of the fourth 
quarter. All new loans are priced to higher spreads with floors in them.  The range that I heard is 4 to 6 percent. So as we look at what is happening to prime, I dont think that is necessarily what is happening to rates at which anyone is actually borrowing.  The big exception to weak demand 
is in mortgage applications, which are at record levels.  There arent as many competitors out there, and as with other credit types, the approval rates are lower.  Appraisals may be a problem, and it is mostly refinance, but there is a trickle of purchase activity.  They tend to believe that the purchase activity is currently being deterred by a fear of job loss and expectations for more government incentives down the road.  The rate drop also came at a seasonally low time for purchasers. Then the last piece is the need to sell an existing home, and they may be upside down in the existing mortgage.  There are reports of contracts sometimes five deep, of the 
     contract waiting for sale of an existing home that is waiting for sale that is waiting for sale.  So if at some point the first sale can occur, it will actually multiply itself in many cases. Finally, banks are actually getting quite creative in growing or strengthening their loan portfolios. There is a network of banks in Nebraska that are actually co-underwriting as well as participating in larger credits.  There was a bank that had offered a 7-year or 10-year fully amortizing mortgage, trying to take advantage of the new propensity to save, and actually has seen great take-up on it from borrowers who want to use the lower rates to pay off their mortgages sooner rather than to lower their payments.  Another one is using the sales force to go out and offer proactively to restructure business and commercial real estate loans, say, for twelve to twenty-four months of interest only to improve the cash flow and at the same time increase the rate on the loan. Another bank is using half of its production teams to go out and sell problem assets to private-market investors who are in their market and familiar with the projects. The bottom linethe community and regional banks are finding ways to survive; in fact, three of the banks had record years on the upside for 2008.  But it is really ugly out there.  So while there are some signs of recovery in markets, they are outside the banking system.  I think that it is going to be incredibly difficult to stimulate the economy through the programs that 
involve bank lending. It is going to take more-direct programs, such as mortgage-backed security purchases or the TALF to act as stand-ins for the securitization markets.  In fact, I believe this is the time to expand the range of mortgages that are eligible for GSE guarantees to include jumbo and higher loan-to-value mortgages as a way to replace the currently closed private-label markets.  Even if the government takes the problem loans off bank balance sheets, we will still ultimately need to liquidate much of the underlying collateral, and that is going to require more lending than the banks can currently fund.  We could also find ourselves at some 
  point using the discount window in more and more of a Home Loan Bank way for core funding rather than as a lender of last resort to fund the nonmortgage lending. I know that all of these suggestions go against the grain of almost everyone here, but frankly, capital alone just will not restart bank lending.  I think the banks are going to pull back, repair as best they can, and create the earnings to rebuild their own capital until they can begin to attract private equity.  President Bullard yesterday used a phrase.  He said that people do the best they can given the constraints they face, and that is how I would title my remarks.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you all very much. Debbie informs me that coffee is ready. Why dont we take a 20-minute break.  Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why dont we reconvene.  I can start by offering a summary of the discussion around the table, which was informative as always but fairly uniform this time.  The intermeeting data, as we have seen, indicate a very sharp contraction, both domestically and abroad, which reflects in large part the effects of the intensification of the financial crisis but also the increasingly powerful feedback loop from the economy to financial conditions. Many people noted that the financial conditions remain very fragile.  Consumption, employment, and production indicators suggest that the pronounced contraction in activity in the fourth quarter is likely to continue through the first part of 2009.  Participants noted that the slowdown is very widespread across sectors. Some participants expect a return to positive economic growth later this year, citing such factors as fiscal policy, lower oil prices, inventory adjustments, government efforts to stabilize the financial sector, and the possibility of improving confidence. However, uncertainty remains high, and risks are to the downside as sentiment is 
 currently very depressed. Moreover, based on experiences with other financial crises, the possibility of a protracted slump or L-shaped recovery remains significant. Some financial markets, including markets that have received Fed support, such as the money and mortgage markets, have shown modest signs of improvement.  However, bank losses for the fourth quarter were greater than markets anticipated, and many institutions remain under substantial stress. Bank loans are declining with tighter terms, falling credit demand, and a lack of creditworthy borrowers. Very tight credit conditions are, in turn, affecting both households and firms.  Declining asset values are also affecting wealth and confidence, including declines in defined-contribution pension plans.  Whether the new government initiatives to stabilize banking are successful will be an important factor in the outlook. Consumers continue to retrench, cutting back as balance sheets are repaired and precautionary saving rises in an uncertain environment.  Employment declines have been large, with firms projecting further job cuts ahead, and there are wage and salary freezes occurring.  Fiscal stimulus could also provide a boost to consumer income and support state and local spending, which is currently contracted. There has been little indication of stabilization in the housing sector as house prices and building activity continue to decline.  Nonresidential construction is likely to fall as financing dries up and fundamentals weaken.  A number of participants expressed concern that commercial real estate could follow the path of residential real estate. Other investment has also contracted in light of prevailing uncertainties, including uncertainties about government policy, tight credit, and low capacity utilization.  Lower commodity prices have affected drilling and mining activity and to a lesser extent agriculture.  Exports and imports have both fallen sharply, reflecting both domestic and global slowdowns and possibly lessened availability of trade finance. 
  Inflation has fallen significantly and looks likely to be low in the medium term.  There is some risk that inflation could fall below levels consistent with good economic performance, and some expressed concern about a deflationary trap possibly at the global level.  However, maintaining stable inflation expectations remains very important.  Currently there appears to be quite a bit of diversity in the publics inflation expectations, including concerns about both deflationary and inflationary outcomes.  That is just a summary of comments I heard.   I do not have a great deal to add on my own. Let me make just a few remarks.  Obviously, I share with everyone the observation that activity has fallen very rapidly, perhaps not much more quickly than expected at our last meeting but still confirming the very substantial effects of the financial crisis and the overall tightening in the credit markets.  A somewhat bigger surprise is the decline in global economies, which has been more severe than anticipated.  On a global basis, this seems very likely to be the worst postwar recession, and the global declines will make it more difficult for the U.S. economy to recover. As others have noted, there have been some marginal improvements in a few financial markets, and the Feds programs, at least in those markets, seem to have had some benefits.  We have seen a little improvement in corporate bond markets as well.  The most important news on 
the financial side since the last meeting, though, has been the worse-than-expected results in the banking system, the fact that we have had to go back and address instability in two of our largest 
four banking organizations, despite the large injections of TARP capital.  It is indicative of the tremendous concerns about the stability of the banking system.  The continuing credit losses pose a real challenge both to the banking system and to efforts by the government and the 
Treasury to restore stability. 
  My general view is that, although fiscal policy could be helpful and will probably provide some impetus later this year and next year, we may see something similar to what we saw in the spring, which was a temporary boost and then very little sustained recovery unless we can get substantial improvement in the banking situation.  I share the same uncertainties about the prospects of recovery or at least the beginning of positive economic growth later this year that 
others have. The Greenbook case relies fairly heavily on inventory dynamics.  Currently inventory liquidation is subtracting from growth, and so stabilizing final sales at zero by midyear, which seems like an easy task, would be sufficient to give us some positive growth.  That said, it is probably not such an easy thing to ensure that final sales stabilize.  We should expect to see continued declines in investment and in trade.  We may see some growth in government, obviously with the fiscal programs; but even so, to get to zero growth in final sales, the Greenbook needs to forecast growth of about 2 percent in real consumption in the second half of the year, which given current developments may not be so easy to obtain.  So like many of you, I guess that we will see a stabilization, perhaps some modest positive growth, in the latter part of this year, but this is by no means a certainty.  It will depend very substantially and perhaps most fundamentally on achieving some stabilization in the banking sector.  I dont think that other financial improvements will compensate for continued deterioration in bank balance 
sheets. The next intermeeting period will be very important.  It is of great significance that we have now made it through the political transition period.  I think it did create additional uncertainty. It is interesting that the implications of the March inauguration in 1933 were the reason we pushed it back to January, and we may make it November 5 next time.  [Laughter] But I think it is good that we do havepolitical views notwithstanding one way or the othera 
  new Administration with some political capital and with a mandate to take action, and we ought to know a lot more by the next meeting about what those plans are and how the Federal Reserve fits into the overall program for stabilization.  So I think that this intermeeting period will be critical. On inflation, I tend to take the conventional view that the extent of slack and declining commodity prices, because of both domestic and foreign slow growth, will lead to declining inflation. I recognize the issues about expectations.  I think on the whole, though, that they will move down rather than up. It is important to note that, given that we are already at zero in terms of the policy rate, the dividing line between deflation and inflation is not really that significant.  Its disinflation at this point, which both raises real interest rates and creates the debt deflation mechanism that moves wealth from debtors to creditors, which for good reasons is probably not 
a neutral transfer because of the effects it has on financial stability.  So I do think that disinflation is a concern, but that is probably a relatively slow moving process, and we can keep our eye on it. I do hope that improving our communication with respect to our inflation objectives will, on the margin, be beneficial.  Of course, inflation expectations are important both in financial markets and in the general public.  I imagine our communications are more effective on the financial side, but we can also try to have a more aggressive communication strategy with respect to the broader public. I will make just one comment anticipating policy a bit, which is that I think we ought to recognize that we could be at zero for quite a long time.  There were a few comments that, with economic growth expected beginning in the second half, we might be coming out of zero relatively soon, and it could be the case.  I think we have to be prepared to do that. But even aside from the Greenbooks very long term projection of zero rates, I noted that, if you take the 
                                                        4 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). central tendencies of this Committee for 2011 and stick them into a Taylor rule, you still get minus interest rates.  So I still think, based on the median and modal views of this Committee, it is likely that rates will be low for some time.  Therefore I agree with President Bullard that we do have to think very hard about our quantitative approaches and, as we discussed yesterday, find ways to make them more effective, to communicate them more accurately, and to assess them quantitatively. Those are all critical steps, and that will be a challenge for us as we go forward.  So even if we are not moving the federal funds rate around, there is still going to be a great deal to do and a great deal to think about.  Let me stop there and turn now to Brian Madigan to introduce the policy round. MR. MADIGAN.4  I will be referring to the package labeled Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.  This package includes the revised versions of the draft statements that were distributed on Monday.  By lowering the target federal funds rate essentially to zero at its last meeting, the Committee entered the realm of unconventional monetary policy.  Given our limited experience operating in this regime, I thought it might be helpful to begin my remarks by reviewing the various tools you might employ if you decide that further monetary policy stimulus is appropriate. First, the Committee can communicate its intentions in ways designed to influence the expectations of private-sector decisionmakers.  For example, as President Plosser noted, the Committee could provide additional information to the market about its expectation for the path of the federal funds rate.  In its December 
statement, the Committee offered some information about its intentions by indicating that it anticipates that weak economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.  The Committees action to lower 
the federal funds rate target nearly to zero was greater than market participants generally expected, and its message about short-term rates remaining low for some
time further conditioned expectations.  Interest rates moved noticeably lower across the entire yield curve, indicating that the combination of the action and the statement provided additional monetary stimulus. The Committee could be more specific about the future path of the funds ratefor example, by being more explicit about how long the target rate is likely to remain close to zero or even by providing your expectations to the market for the trajectoryof rates after liftoff. For example, just as you provide ranges and central tendencies for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, you could likewise do for 
     the fed funds rate. However, given the enormous uncertainties about the financial and economic outlook, you might be uncomfortable providing such specificity, and you may be concerned about the implications for the Federal Reserves credibility if those expectations proved to be far off the mark.  Varying your qualitative descriptions of the path of the funds rate in light of incoming data is another possibility. At some point you might also wish to consider articulating the conditions that would prompt you to begin raising rates.  At a minimum, though, as the Chairman noted, the Committee could continue to reiterate that interest rates are 
likely to remain low for some time.  Unless the evolving economic outlook strengthens considerably relative to your economic forecasts, delivering this message 
continuously seems likely to be an essential component of the Committees communications for a while. The Committee could also communicate its views regarding other policy tools. For example, it could be explicit about the amounts of open market purchases that it intends to undertake, the types of securities it intends to buy, and the time frame for those purchases.  The Committees December statement 
followed this principle regarding mortgage-backed securities and agency debt. The Committee could also expand its communications about inflation.  For example, the Committee could make clear that any near-term declines in inflation below its optimal level will be strongly resisted in the medium to long term.  With nominal short-term rates now pinned at zero, measures that support inflation 
expectations may reduce the upward pressure on real interest rates that develops as actual inflation declines, thus limiting the extent of restraint on aggregate demand that 
emanates from that source.  In this regard, you have several communication approaches at your disposal. For example, as discussed earlier this month, the Committee could establish and publish a numerical longer-term inflation objective.  Or the Committee could decide to proceed with collecting and publishing participants longer-term projections for inflation, growth, and unemploymentan approach that most of you evidently support.  Of course, you could implement both approaches, with the longer-term projections explaining how you envision that inflation will approach your longer-run objective over time and how growth and 
unemployment will converge toward their steady-state values.  A decision on the 
longer-term projections is included later in the agenda for todays meeting.  A third possibility is that the Committee could use its statement to make clear that it recognizes the risk that inflation could fall persistently below its optimal level.  By explicitly identifying that possibility, the Committee would suggest that it is prepared to take actions to counteract such an outcome. The ability to further expand the Federal Reserves balance sheet to apply additional economic stimulusor at least to offset some of the restraint coming from developments in financial marketsoffers another set of unconventional policy tools.  In particular, the Federal Reserve can expand its use of what the Chairman has called credit policies by implementing programs designed to facilitate flows of credit to borrowers who normally obtain funds through markets that have become 
dysfunctional. To an important degree, the opportunities for exercising these tools will be driven by ongoing market developments:  Apart from expansions of existing 
      facilities, either in terms of amounts or in terms of coverage, it is difficult to predict exactly how such credit policies might be augmentedor even whether it would be desirable to create new facilitieswithout advance knowledge of where market conditions might deteriorate next.  However, as discussed yesterday and today, the Federal Reserve has already indicated the possibility of expanding the TALF to include commercial-mortgage-backed securities.  In assessing whether expansion of such facilities is warranted, the Federal Reserve will need to take careful account not only of the possible efficacy of the programs but also of a range of other considerations, including moral hazard and the implications for the Systems exit strategy in returning to a normal framework for conducting monetary policy.  Other aspects of the Federal Reserves balance sheet, such as the reciprocal swap arrangements and the Systems portfolio of Treasury and agency securities, offer a third set of opportunities for providing greater stimulus.  At the moment, there would not seem to be much motivation for increasing the authorized amounts of swap lines, as conditions in global interbank funding markets have generally improved somewhat over recent months. However, expanding the Systems purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities might represent a more compelling possibility for applying further monetary stimulus.  Purchases of longer-term Treasury securities are another possibility. The Systems MBS purchases have already had a notable effect in lowering mortgage rates, and the Committee might see further action in this direction as likely to be productive. As discussed by the Committee yesterday, purchases of Treasury securities might help improve conditions in private credit markets, but engaging in such purchases would also have some disadvantages.   Alternative A for this meeting, the draft statement for which is shown on the next page of the exhibits, would exercise several of the options for applying more stimulus.  The decision to apply additional stimulus under this alternative would be explained by the indication in the first sentence of paragraph 2 that the economy has 
weakened somewhat more than anticipated.  It would also be supported by the statement in the last sentence of the paragraph that the downside risks to the outlook are significantan adjective that, as President Fisher noted, might be seen as less alarming than sizable while still getting the point across.  Paragraph 3 would indicate that the Committee expects inflation pressures to remain subdued, and it 
would reveal a concern that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer run.  As I noted previously, identifying this risk explicitly could help reduce the extent to which market participants lower their assessment of the FOMCs inflation expectations in response 
to near-term declines in inflation.  Paragraph 4 reiterates the point made in December 
that the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote the resumption of 
sustainable economic growth and again notes that these measures are likely to keep the size of the balance sheet at a high level. The next two paragraphs provide language to explain the choice of an expanded program of purchasing mortgage-backed securities or a new program to purchase Treasury securities. Alternative 1 would increase the planned purchases of MBS to 
      $750 billion; the current pace of purchases would be maintained, and the additional amounts would be purchased in the third quarter.  Market participants have already expressed some concern about what happens when the currently authorized program concludes at midyear, and an announcement of additional purchases of MBS seems likely to at least maintain, if not increase, the downward pressure on mortgage rates.  Alternative 2 would entail the purchase of up to $250 billion in Treasury securities this year. The final paragraph of the statement for alternative A notes that the Federal Reserve will soon implement the TALF.  It also indicates that the Committee will be monitoring the Federal Reserves balance sheet and assessing whether expansion of or modifications to the lending facilities would serve to further support credit markets and economic activity and help to preserve price stability.  All in all, alternative A would be most consistent with a view that the economic outlook is unsatisfactory, that the Committee has several tools that it can employ to improve that outlook, and that the benefits entailed in using these tools outweigh the costs. Alternative B, shown on the next page, would also express the view that the federal funds rate is likely to remain low for some time, but it differs in some notable respects from alternative A.  The first sentence in the second paragraph cites evidence that the outlook remains weak but does not state that the economy has deteriorated further.  However, like alternative A, it notes that the downside risks to the outlook are significant. The inflation paragraph also points to subdued inflation pressures, but it omits any indication of concern about the downside risks to inflation.  The final paragraph notes that the FOMC stands ready to expand the quantity of its MBS purchases and the duration of the program as conditions warrant; this indication would also help address market concerns about the end of the program at midyear.  The draft indicates that the Committee is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities if evolving circumstances indicate that such transactions would be particularly effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.  This wording is intended, first, to indicate that the Committee has reached a decisionit is not still evaluating possible purchases; second, to suggest that the Committee does not see such purchases as the most beneficial action the Federal Reserve can take in current circumstances; and third, to note that conditions could change in a way that would prompt the Committee to initiate purchases. Overall, alternative B does not entail additional action at this meeting.  The Committee would indicate a possible expansion of its MBS program without taking such action now. But the statement would suggest that the FOMC is unlikely to 
purchase Treasury securities, at least absent a significant change in circumstances.  With market participants evidently building in significant odds of Fed purchases, it seems likely that such a statement could spur a noticeable backup in longer-term 
Treasury yieldsperhaps as much as 20 basis points or so.  The Committee might be 
inclined toward alternative B if it sees the economic outlook as not having deteriorated materially since the last meeting.  It might be encouraged by the tentative signs of improvement in some financial markets and believe that further 
improvements are possible as the TALF comes on line.  It also might think that the passage of a large fiscal stimulus package is likely and that further significant 
      legislation to provide support to financial markets and institutions could be forthcoming from the Congress.  In these circumstances, and with the Federal Reserve already having applied considerable monetary and financial stimulus, the Committee might think it most reasonable at this time to monitor the effects of the 
actions taken to date, assess the likely effects of further policy actions, and be prepared to implement additional measures such as expanded purchases of mortgage-
backed securities, if needed. Alternative C, shown on the next page of the handout, also would express the view that the federal funds rate is likely to remain low for some time.  It would note that the Federal Reserve continues to purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities and would note the imminent implementation of the TALF. However, this alternative would be silent on further Federal Reserve actions to support credit markets and stimulate the economy.  With no mention at all of possible purchases of Treasury securities, market participants would likely conclude that the Federal Reserve had dropped the idea, and Treasury note and bond yields could jump appreciably.  More generally, analysts would infer that the Federal Reserve was unlikely to take further stimulative policy actions.  Alternative C is most 
consistent with a view that considerable monetary and financial stimulus has already been applied and that the potential costs of further stimulative actions by the Federal Reserve outweigh the potential benefits.The statement released after the December meeting is included as the last page for your reference. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Questions? All right.  If there are no questions, why dont we begin our policy and statement go-round.  Lets start with President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I prefer alternative A. The current outlook envisions an inflation rate below 2 percent throughout the forecast period.  We have judgmentally adjusted our inflation forecast upward relative to the straight model outlook.  Thus, our forecast entails a significant risk of deflation occurring in 2010 unless additional actions are taken. I see little harm in expanding our program of purchases of mortgage-backed securities and GSE securities to lower mortgage rates further.  While this alone is unlikely to be sufficient, it will help stabilize housing and the financial sector.  I would prefer this policy to purchasing long-term Treasury securities.  Rates on long-term Treasury securities remain quite low as many investors prefer to hold government securities of all maturities.  Trying to reduce the spreads 
  relative to Treasuries is likely to be more effective as it more directly attacks the elevated borrowing costs. I would note that, in our own projections over the three-year period, not a single one of us had an unemployment rate back below 5 percent, and I would note that only one of us thought that we would get to 2 percent if that was our inflation goal over the three-year period.  The difference between alternative A and alternative B is whether we say we might do something versus doing something.  It does seem that, if all of us think that we are not going to get to where we want to go within three years, this would be the time to actually do something.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, obviously, as we have said, the downside risks to the economy are quite large, in part because we are involved in very serious banking conditions that probably also will worsen significantly over the next several months.  In particular, the exposures of the banking system and insurance industries to commercial real estate, as we have said, represent a significant risk both to financial stability and to economic activity.  There has been some improvement in financial market functioning in recent weeks, but most of the improvement is tied to the significant support from our programs and other government programs and not from the markets repairing themselves.  These repairs still lie ahead, I suspect, and this will absorb increasing amounts of our time as we try to deal with that. Second, over the next several months, fiscal policy will take center stage. I think this is the first phase that we are hearing all the discussions about now, and this Committee will need to decide how it should position itself relative to a potentially large amount of new fiscal stimulus that has really not all been defined at this point.  I suggest it would be prudent then to wait to see 
 more about the form, timing, and likely effect of the fiscal stimulus before firmly committing to new expansionary policy programs that would be defined in alternative A.  In addition, fiscal steps to deal with toxic assets and thereby improve the functioning of the financial system may alter our approach to supporting the financial system and market stability.  I think there are some pretty significant issues around these institutions that will be discussed in the very near future.  Consequently, I favor alternative B rather than alternative A at this time. Also, as to additional nontraditional monetary policy measures that we might employ, I agree with the Board staffs recommendation that we retain the option of purchasing long-term Treasury securities at a future date but not engage in these purchases now.  I do agree with what President Rosengren had to say about that. Treasury purchases would send a clear signal.  In addition to what President Rosengren said, they would clearly begin to acknowledge the monetizing of our deficit. At this juncture, I would prefer that we continue with our previously announced efforts to reduce the spreads of agency and private securities over Treasuries.  I would also like to recommend that we think ahead as to how we might provide support to institutions and markets that provide financing to commercial real estate, should conditions in that sector continue to deteriorate.  It would be helpful to try to outline a process that does not force us to again go around the intermediation process or find ourselves in a kind of very quick, over-the-weekend approach to things. I also favor the inflation risk discussion in alternative B. As I indicated earlier, the decline in overall and core inflation in the last couple of months and during the recession is to be expected and represents really no surprise, although it is significant.  Although I expect inflation to remain low for some time, I do not feel that deflationary risks have increased to the point that we need to reflect them in our communications.  In fact, I think that to do so could only lower 
  inflation expectations and put pressure on real interest rates.  Ill stop at that point. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I think its important to reiterate that we will likely maintain our target range of 0 to  percent for some time.  I am certainly open to the idea of buying longer-term Treasuries, but I would not go forward with such a policy today, and I like the wording in B concerning our attitude toward that.  I am certainly also very open to the idea of expanding our purchases of mortgage-backed securities and supportive of President Rosengrens views on this.  I think I would not go forward with it today, however, given that we have only just begun to buy these securities.  We have a long way to go before we ramp up to anything close to our commitment, and right now it makes sense to wait to see what the Administration puts forward in terms of their program to support the banking system, to see if they are willing to collaborate with us in expanding the TALF facility, and in what directions they plan to go and in what ways they may proceed to support the housing market.  So just in terms of the timing of a further commitment there, I think I would be tempted to wait. The one suggestion I would make concerning alternative B is that I would like to add to it the sentence from the end of paragraph 3 in alternative A that concerns the inflation risk assessment.  The additional sentence reads, Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that 
inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term.  I would add that to B because I think it is an accurate assessment of the situation, and commenting on the risk makes our discussion of inflation comparable to our discussion of growth, where we also comment on the risks. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you noted, we all agree that the outlook for economic growth is bleak.  To be sure, our policy actions so far have been aggressive; but even so, I have a predisposition to provide further monetary stimulus.  From a risk-management perspective, there are very few scenarios I can think of that would suggest that further monetary stimulus would be a mistake.  But despite my bias for action, I am hesitant about how to proceed. As I was putting my thoughts together for this portion of the meeting, I recalled the many conversations that we have had around this table about our communication policy.  Even when 
we were operating in a well-defined policy regime, we often experienced great difficulty in determining how best to express our decision and our intentions publicly.  Now we are operating in a new policy regimecredit easingthat we understand conceptually but for which no operational handbook yet exists. We dont know how to write down the policy rule for this environment, and we surely dont have any empirical estimates to guide our decisions.  Our discussion yesterday about what the effect is of a $250 billion purchase of MBS or a $250 billion purchase of longer-term Treasury securities demonstrates that we just do not have certainty around the effects of those actions.  Before this crisis began, the public had a fairly good grasp of our policy rule. Now they are trying to find the new rule, and I hope they do not find one before we figure out exactly what it is. [Laughter] I certainly hope that we find it before John Taylor does. The serious issue is how we can best manage expectations in this policy regime when we are so uncertain about so many things.  Alternative A, in my view, conveys a stronger degree of 
certainty to the public than I have at the moment about our policy rule.  I dont know the basis 
 for selecting $250 billion more of mortgage-backed securities or $250 billion additional in the longer-term Treasuries.  I do not want to convey or set up the expectations that, by wanting to ease more, we are now going to use the $250 billion increase in our announcement of purchases, whether they are mortgage-backed securities or longer-term Treasuries, just as the  percentage point change in the fed funds rate had been viewed in our prior policy regime.  Alternative B 
doesnt cite specific quantities, but it does communicate a willingness to step up the pace and to 
extend the duration of our credit programs, and I think that is the appropriate action for today.  The alternative also reminds the public that additional credit easing in the form of the TALF and mortgage-backed security purchases is on the horizon, and I think we will be well served to tell the public as much as we can and then update them frequently as our own views evolve.  I think alternative B does that without overstating what we know. In favoring alternative Band I am now the fourth person in this go-roundI am going to offer a fourth alternative in terms of the language.  I, like President Yellen, would add paragraph 3 from alternative A regarding our inflation outlook.  Then given our go-round today and your comments about how you heard the go-round, Mr. Chairman, I think paragraph 2 in alternative A more accurately describes the view that we have had more weakening than we 
thought. So those changesparagraphs 2 and 3 out of alternative A but paragraph 4 out of alternative Bare what I would recommend for today.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just to clarify, I think what Brian says is right.  The only difference between alternative A, paragraph 2, and alternative B, paragraph 2 is that in A(2) it says weakened somewhat more than anticipated whereas in B(2) it says just remains weak. MR. MADIGAN. Right. 
   MS. PIANALTO. Right, and we were commenting that many of us said that things had gotten weaker.  That is the only observation I would make.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to counsel essentially a wait-and-see attitude, and then I am going to confuse you by arguing that later we should be very aggressive. I think the wait-and-see attitude would echo a lot of what President Yellen said.  We have a new Administration coming in.  They are promising to be very aggressive on many dimensions.  One of them is a fiscal stimulus package.  I think we want to see what that turns out to be and what the provisions of that are at the end of the day. There we have some fairly good expectations, but I think I would still want to see how it pans out. More critical are the discussions about direct approaches to try to mitigate problems in financial markets, possibly through an aggregator bank.  I see this as absolutely critical as to how we might proceed going forward, so I would want to hear more about what is going to happen on that dimension.  I do think we will get a lot of information over the next several weeks along that dimension, so that is an argument to wait and see what happens.  Also, we have our program of outright purchases of MBS, which is generally regarded as successful, but we are only a bit along on that. We are not up to our $500 billion target, and so we can let that continue while we try to get information about what the new Administration has in mind.  For these reasons, I think my position is most consistent with alternative B, but I do have several comments on the alternatives. My first commentand I was talking about this last timeis that I would prefer to get the federal funds rate off the top of the statement.  I would move it to the end.  This is not projected to change for a long time, maybe four years.  What you learn in English class about 
  writing is that you put your main message first.  Your main message is, Here are the things that are different from where we were last time.  Obviously the interest rate is not going to change for a long time.  You want to be stressing right off the bat that here is the key decision that we made today, and so I would try to rearrange this to put that first.  I do not have specific suggestions on this. I think that would go a long way to communicate the nature of monetary policy during 2009, 2010, and 2011. Again, I want to stress that we really have to work hard to get the private sector off the idea that the federal funds rate is the definition of monetary policy.  There are many things that we have been discussing that can be done, and we are doing them, so we have to design our statement to reflect that.  I think that even our own thinking has not evolved away from the federal funds rate as the definition of monetary policy as much as it needs to. A central bank that refuses to talk openly about money creation is suspect.  If we refuse to discuss the matter or discuss the matter only euphemistically, we will lose credibility.  Furthermore, others will discuss it for us, and the private sector will define who we are and what we are doing. So I think we should be more open in talking about our policy, which is direct open market purchases by reserve creation.  We should think harder about that, and we should talk more about that. I think that I have quantitative measures.  I know we do not like to talk about money here, but lets talk about money for just a minute.  M2 growth was quite rapid in the fourth quarter, and that seems promising to me given the situation globally.  But it seems that the staff expects M2 growth actually to moderate in 2009 down to 3 percent.  That seems counterproductive to me.  We should be more aggressive if we want to get something like a broad measure of money growing rapidly enough that were sure that were going to be able to avoid a global deflation trap. That gives you something to shoot for.  We recognize that the old debates on money 
 pointed out that linkages are not tied to ultimate outcomes.  We know that, but still, in an environment of zero nominal interest rates, this might be a reasonable way to go.  People would understand what were talking about and would understand that we have our inflation objectives in mind as we are trying to ease here.  So that is just a little comment on M2. I have also come to the conclusionand maybe all of you were ahead of methat time may not be a healer here as far as financial market problems.  There were a lot of comments around the table that, well, well give the financial markets more timesix monthsto adjust and so on. Well, we are 18 months into this crisis, and I actually thought when we were a year into the crisis that markets had had enough time to adjust.  It did not prove to be the case.  So the thing is that these information problems do not go away with the passage of time.  I think that is the key thing that we have learned here. Eighteen months along, and this is as bad as everthis is in the last couple of weeks.  So direct approaches to solve market information problems are going to be essential, and thats one reason that we need to see what the new Treasury and the new Administration have in mind on that dimension. But to the extent that a direct solution does not materializeand it is certainly very possible that something gets proposed, and something gets done, and then it does not work very wellthen that may dictate our policy.  We may have to be all the more aggressive in that scenario, but I want to wait and see how this stacks up in the next few weeks. Explicit numbers in the alternatives, as in Alternative A, seem crude and suspect to me.  What we would like to be talking about is the growth rate of the balance sheet net of the temporary components or the easily reversible components.  We would like to cull out the lender-of-last-resort programs, the ones that we think will go away in a reasonable time frame or 
will naturally go away if market conditions improve.  But we also have more-persistent or mo
  permanent components of the balance sheet, such as MBS purchases, which I do not think we will be in a position to reverse anytime soon.  That to me is just an increase in the money supply. These individual numbers might also create option values to waiting in the market.  You might think that mortgage rates are low today, but maybe the Fed will come out in the spring and 
announce another $500 billion, and so you will wait because you think mortgage rates are going to be even lower in the future.  In the past when we have talked about quantitative things, it has always been in growth rate terms or some kind of growth rate strategy that extended over the whole projection period, so the explicit numbers at this point seem crude to me. My sense is that we may have room to do much more in open market purchases than we have right now based on what the Greenbook is telling us.  Five years from now we still do not have inflation up at 2 percent, as President Rosengren pointed out.  If that is really what we thinkand one of the simulations added $1 trillion to that and we still did not hit our inflation target after five yearspossibly we have room to do a lot more and could be a lot more aggressive.  But I just do not think at this point we have the right metrics in place, so I just cannot be sure at this point. I think that is where we can improve in the next couple of meetings.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly think the economic outlook is unsatisfactory, and it sure has not gotten any better over the intermeeting period.  I am not sure it has gotten materially worse. If I look at the Greenbook forecast, the revisions to Q4 and Q1 are to the right of the decimal point, and we have a lot more fiscal stimulus coming.  I am not totally comfortable with President Pianaltos suggestion to emphasize that it has gotten worse, but certainly the outlook remains quite weak.  I think we are in a situation where we need to be 
  looking for everything we can do to ease financial conditions.  I would encourage you, Mr. Chairman, to pursue an understanding with the Treasury, which you talked about yesterday, about the division of responsibilities on risk-taking and also about reserve sterilization over time.  In particular, if we can get legislation and understanding on the latter that enables the Treasury or, even better, the Federal Reserve to issue bills without debt limits and congressional controls, what you called yesterday the shadow price of our balance sheet space would diminish very, very considerably, and we could play the more aggressive role that President Bullard was talking about. We wouldnt have to worry about how we are going to take it back.  If we have another tool to take it back, we would be much more aggressive on our activities. I think right now the constraints on the financial system are more about capital and worries about future capital, downside risk, than they are about liquidity.  I do like the division of labor in the TALFthat the Treasury takes the risk and we supply the liquidity.  I think I am uncertain now whether it will be effective.  I think there is a good chance, but as we get experience with that, we should be looking very hard at other markets like CMBS that might also be helpful. Also, we should be looking at how we could be useful in other aspects of TARP 2, subject to the constraints about risk-taking and balance sheet space that you had noted yesterday, Mr. Chairman.  I think lifting and ring-fencing assets may be very, very valuable to reducing risk 
and stabilizing the system. On the Treasury security purchases, I think it is correct not to do that now.  I guess I would keep it a little more on the front burner than what I am hearing from some other people.  Rates are pretty low now. I would keep my eye on those forward rates.  If they look as though they are coming up, I would give it some serious consideration if we thought that the market was 
 building expectations about future rates that were inconsistent with returning the economy to high levels of employment over time. I would be more in favor of it. So I think we have a number of things in train right now.  We need to see how the Administration is working out.  I agree with the others who have said that we are temporarily in wait-and-see mode.  I am comfortable with not doing anything now, as we have under alternative B, but working very, very hard on new initiatives as we see where we can be useful. With regard to other wording issues on alternative B, I agree with President Yellen and President Pianalto that taking that sentence from A about inflation being too low and putting it in paragraph 3 here would be good, especially in conjunction with that help to preserve price stability that President Fisher suggested we put in the last paragraph because now we are helping to preserve it from below.  I think those two things would work together, and I hope we have the long-term projections coming out, which will reinforce that message.  So I agree with that. President Bullard yesterday and again today emphasized whether the monetary aggregates or reserve aggregates can be useful to us.  I guess I start somewhat skeptical about that, but I think we should be doing very hard research about whether broad measures of money or narrow measures of reserves have some relationship to spending even at the zero bound.  President Bullard, you said that M2 growth looks a little low to you this year.  Under these circumstances, how are we going to raise that?  Will putting in more reserves do anything?  I am not sure, but I would encourage you and your staff and others around the System to work hard on whether these quantitative measures are more useful to us right now.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, President Hoenig. 
  MR. HOENIG. Two or three people have mentioned the last sentence in paragraph 3.  I would just like to get a bit of reaction from Governor Kohn or President Yellen.  My concern with putting that sentence in is that you change expectations toward the thing you are trying to avoid. If we suddenly start saying that we are thinking inflation is getting too low and it is not consistent, people then are going to be convinced that it is getting too low and we are going to put more pressure on it.  We ought at least to think about that before we get on a bandwagon here. That is my caution.  I do not know if anyone wants to comment. MR. PLOSSER. I would just reiterate that. I worry about that phrase for exactly that reason. We potentially shape the expectations in a way that we do not want to have them shaped by going too far in that direction.  So I share your view. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It is a very difficult question.  On the other hand, it also suggests that our policy will be more aggressive.  So it is a bit hard. I honestly do not know. MR. PLOSSER. Or, in fact, it may suggest that, if we believe it, our policies arent going to be enough to prevent it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see. President Lacker. MS. YELLEN. It is in our longer-term forecasts. 
MR. KOHN. Yes. Well, we will be publishing forecasts that have those inflation numbers in them. MR. LACKER. The spread of views on this is likely to be related to the extent to which we believe our credibility is completein other words, if we think that expectations about inflation are so fragile and so changeable that our statement highlighting the possibility of deflation could move them around.  On the other hand, you could take the point of view that they are so well anchored that it will not move them around.  I find myself in the Hoenig and Plosser 
     camp on thisnot viewing them as as well established as we want.  Well, that is consistent with my statement. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The tension here is that this is probably factually correct, and so the question is whether or not you want to say what is factually correct because you are afraid that it will influence expectations. MR. PLOSSER. Well, there are a lot of things that are factually correct that we dont say. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That is also factually correct.  [Laughter] Others can comment on this. I must admit to not having a strong view myself.  I think the cowards way out is to say that we do not know yet. That would be one reason, President Yellen, to delay a 
meeting or two before putting that in.  But, of course, I understand exactly what you are saying, and it may well be the case that this is yet another way of signaling a long-term, aggressive policy. But, President Evans, you are next, so why dont we just go straight to you? MR. EVANS. Let me ask a question.  Has anybody conveyed that thought in speeches or testimony either from you or Governor Kohn, in which case it would be less newsworthy? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I do not think so, and that is why I am a little leery. MR. EVANS. All right. Thank you. 
MR. YELLEN. I have certainly said it in speeches. MR. EVANS. Right. I may have said something like that, too; Im not quite sure.  Okay. Thank you. I do find myself largely in agreement with the emerging consensus here.  In fact, as I was listening to President Yellens comments, I found them to be wholly satisfactory from my viewpoint. I do have a preference for alternative A today.  I think obviously what we would like 
to do is to lower the funds rate, but we cannot do that.  So we are struggling for the best way to do that, and we do not have a great way to understand exactly the influence of our credit programs on that. I ask myself what the value of waiting and seeing is right now.  On the one hand, we have not implemented the TALF, although we have been talking about it for quite some time, and so it 
will be useful to have some experience with that and see what the signals are coming from that.  I find myself in agreement with Governor Kohn on this, but I am unsure how it is going to work out, and so there will probably be some adjustments.  Then I ask myself whether we can afford to wait, given what we are looking at.  It does seem as if there is a lot of uncertainty as to fiscal policyexactly what the size of it will be and how it will play out.  In our own forecast we have 
a stronger role than some others, but uncertainty is there.  As I looked at alternative A with the MBS, it mentions that we are not going to complete this until the end of the third quarter, and that by itself has a great amount of delay.  I think that is very pragmatic, and that is the way it would actually occur. I am not quite sure whether the cost of putting that off and announcing it at our next meeting, if that is the right way to do it, would be that high.  There is also the uncertainty of what the Administration will pursue.  As President Bullard and others mentioned, if there is a proposal for a large aggregator bank coming forward from the Administration, what will be the size of that?  What are the dimensions of that, and would we need a big action now or how would that play into it?  There are a lot of uncertainties, and so I just cannot say I know for sure on that. In terms of the specifics, I did find myself okay with the language on inflation perhaps as below rates that best foster economic growth.  But I agreethere is a lot of uncertainty as to 
how that will be perceived, but it does seem factually correct that there is some risk.  So I would 
  be okay with that. I suppose we have not really discussedor have we?your question, Mr. Chairman, about the sentence whether we anticipate a gradual recovery later this year.  It does seem to me as though in almost every forecast we see economic growth certainly being positive by the fourth quarter and we hope by the third quarter.  I worry a bit that, if we are more pessimistic in our statement about that, it would seem to be some type of vote of no confidence in fiscal actions that are forthcoming.  It doesnt seem to be factually incorrect that we are expecting this, and so I would favor leaving that.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I fully support the expansion that we have engineered in our monetary liabilities.  I view our strategy as having expanded them fairly dramatically to provide stimulus now that we are at the zero bound.  I think our strategy going forward is going to be focused on maintaining them at a high level and, while the economy is in distress, perhaps varying the quantity and perhaps increasing it should distress increase, and that seems productive.  When the economy recovers, begin withdrawing that stimulus; then at some time in the future, lift the funds rate off the floor.  I am cognizant that assessing the appropriate magnitude of that expansion is terribly difficult, for reasons that President Bullard and Governor Kohn discussed. We are, in fact, at the limit of our professional understanding of the transmission mechanism, although I think there is a lot that is known that we could fruitfully review and discuss in the Committee on this issue.  I am less supportive of the way in which we brought about this expansion in our monetary liabilities, as you all know.  As I said yesterday and on many other occasions, I think the case for targeted credit programs is weak, briefly put.  They do not address any demonstrable market failure.  They channel credit away from other worthy borrowers, exacerbate moral hazard, and set bad fiscal precedents. 
  Regarding the exit strategy, I do not see anything inherent in the economics that has motivated our intervention into these programs or that links that to the state of the business cycle and where the funds rate needs to be. So I do not see why it would necessarily be the case that, when we want to lift the funds rate, the perceived needs in any of these dysfunctional credit markets will have necessarily gone away.  I think that is clear just from the way the case has been made and the fact that credit markets can dysfunction in the way they have been claimed to dysfunction in peacetime, in any part of the business cycle. The TALF is our next new targeted credit program to be introduced.  It is on deck to be implemented in February.  I believe that it would be better policy for us not to implement the TALF but instead to expand our balance sheet by buying U.S. Treasury securities.  The effect on credit markets will be more neutral.  It will avoid distorting credit flows across private borrowing segments.  Adverse incentive effects would be minimized, and I think it would maintain more distance between us and redistributional fiscal policies.  Concerning buying Treasuries, I think that monetization is something that I am less concerned with because the way I view it is that the choice should be what we buy, in which case we are monetizing the same amount of stuff. I can appreciate the concern that, coming at a juncture in time in which a large fiscal stimulus is being enacted, there would be a natural riskand I think it is a riskthat the public would make the inference that our increase in the balance sheet was at the behest of the Administration.  I think we should strive to avoid that.  If we maintain our monetary liabilities flat across this episode for the next quarter or so, we would be able to do that, but I will admit that is a risk. You have had conversations and will have conversations with the Administration about the idea of a new accord.  As I said yesterday, I applaud those.  I think that is another reason to hold off introducing any new program that we might ultimately be consideringand I 
   think we ought to considertransferring wholesale to the Treasury.  For all of these reasons, Mr. Chairman, unless we decide at this meeting to defer the TALF, I would respectfully dissent because I would prefer to expand the monetary base by purchasing U.S. Treasury securities rather than through targeted credit programs.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just a small point.  I would view it as unlikely that conditions would be unusual and exigent across a wide span of credit markets simultaneously when we were having a significant recovery in the economy.  But of course, that is an empirical issue. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. MR. LACKER. Excuse me, if I could just replyin the TALF as it is envisioned, we are to declare that for three years it is going to be unusual and exigent, as I understand it.  Is that correct? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. No, not really.  The term funding lasts for three years, but the actual program ends at the end of this year. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right, which is similar, for example, to what the FDIC is doing with the systemic risk exception with the 10-year bond issuance.  Also, from a monetary policy point of view, our plan for these programs is to create terms that will automatically extinguish interest at some point as conditions normalize. MR. LACKER. So the interpretation is that circumstances have to be unusual and exigent at the time it is entered into. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, there are some legal niceties here that we can get to another time. MR. LACKER. No doubt. Thanks. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think it is clear that we will be keeping the funds rate between zero and 25 basis points for some time to come, although some time to come is a bit vague, which obviously has some desirability.  I recall last time that we had a significant discussion about making sure that our statements about the fed funds rate had some conditionality to them.  I do not know whether the statement the way it is worded is actually 
sufficiently conditional or conveys that message or not, but I just raise that as an important aspect of communicating. Our plans are, in fact, conditional, and we need to make sure that is included. Actually, I can live with the language in alternative B.  I think it does seem to characterize the current state of the economy, which is clearly quite weak.  As I expressed earlier, I am really not inclined to put in the additional sentence that President Yellen suggested for the reasons that I worry about the fragility of expectations, and I think we need to maintain our credibility and our firmness with our view that we are going to maintain those.  I am also a little worried. I have two problems with alternative A.  One, it sounds too panicky to me.  The Chairman and actually Governor Kohn mentioned the fact that things look pretty bleak.  But if you look at the Greenbook forecast, it is really not that much different from the one in December.  December was a clear shocker, if you want to think in terms of changing peoples expectations about our forecast profile. From December to now, it is not entirely obvious to me that the bad news we have received was that much unanticipatedmaybe a little, but not hugely.  
So I would hate our statement or the minutes to reflect such a gloomy view that the markets read it as another big downward shift in the forecast because I think it may do more to damage the markets and cause concern.  So I would like to have the minutes and even the statement reflect a 
little more that this was not entirely unanticipated, which is why I like alternative B.  This is not that big a change in our view, which was pretty gloomy to begin with. As I have argued before, and others have mentioned, anchoring inflation expectations, as I alluded to, is central to both our credibility and our success going forward in this environment.  I agree with President Bullard, as he said in the earlier go-round, that the Greenbook pathand I alluded to this as wellof a zero fed funds rate for the next four years paired with a 3 to 4 percent real growth rate and essentially no inflation to me seems highly implausible both as a positive statement in terms of a forecast and as a normative one.  Somehow those three pieces do not fit together real well in the way I think about the world, in part because I am not sure I understand entirely how the expansion of our balance sheet actually fits into that forecast and perhaps how that affects inflation as well.  So I do not find that terribly, terribly plausible. More important, if we are to retain our credibility to maintain stability of inflation expectations, we must develop or offer a more transparent discussion of the link between our current policy actions and that objective or those expectations.  I do not think we have done that yet. In this regard, we do need to think more about sizes, quantities, and evolutions of our balance sheet. As I stressed at our last meeting, and as President Bullard suggested, there are ways to begin doing that. I dont claim to know what those right quantitative measures are.  I think we need to do some research. But just because we dont know what the right measures are doesnt mean that they dont matter or that we should ignore them.  The clarity of policy demanded by the public for the TARP and the pattern of interventions applies not just to the Treasury but also to our bailouts and our interventions.  I think we need to continue to work on transparency in this regard and the way all of these pieces fit together.  Otherwise, I do fear that 
    we would be further contributing to a delay in the recovery, as institutions sit on the sidelines and investors wait to see what next intervention or bailout is likely to come. So I am not terribly comfortable with alternative A.  I dont like naming quantities for some programs and not others.  I think that is not a good strategyit singles out some programs as being more important.  I dont think we know enough about the quantities to be able to mention them.  I also agree with President Hoenig and others who have suggested that we really dont know how the fiscal policy bailout, the aggregator bank, and our roles in these various 
things might evolve.  We need to wait and see before we make commitments to specific numbers 
of things in which we are not sure what role we will play.  Finally, and related to this, I do have some concerns about continuing to discuss programs or actions that we might choose to pursue.  While I understand the intent of that may be to manage expectations and signal our commitment to explore every possible avenue to support the economy, such statements are speculative in some sense and may at times do more to confuse the market than to settle it. Indeed, if we were to talk about things we might do and then decide not to take these actions, how would that affect 
our credibility and the message that we are sending? In his discussion, Brian talked about how the phrase about longer-term securities might be interpretedand this is really what I am referring to.  I dont know how it is going to be interpreted, to tell you the truth. I have a lot of uncertainty.  But I do worry about our talking, in a statement of policy actions, about speculative actions that we dont know whether we are going to do or not. I worry about what that is going to do to the markets, particularly if at some future time we drop it, and that we may have gotten ourselves into a bind by putting it in there.  We need to think very carefully going forward in this regime when we really havent decided yet 
  what policy instruments we are going to be using and how we are going to be using them speculating about that in our statement seems to me to be a bit risky. So I can support alternative B, Mr. Chairman, pretty much as it stands, with the caveats about not being more negative than we were last time and some caveats about both the conditionality and the forward-looking statements.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In my view, the worrisome recent developments in the financial markets, combined with the current self-reinforcing interplay of bank news, economic data, and deteriorating public confidence, call for another increment of action in advance of the Administrations proposals with their inherent unpredictabilitythat is, the unpredictability of the political process.  I could or I will accept alternative B, but I support alternative A, which I would characterize as signaling that things are a bit worse, take out some insurance, and do a little more.  I think the characterizations of the state of the economy in sections 2 and 3 are appropriate. I actually, to some extent, supported the use of the word sizable, but I am certainly okay with the change back to significant as a safer term.  I also interpret section 3 as saying that at least continued disinflation is a real risk, and I think that is a realistic statement at this time.   I support alternative 1 in section 4 with its action of adding $250 billion to the MBS program.  I am persuaded by the staff argument, which is supported by my own staff, to defer but keep on the table the introduction of a longer-term Treasury securities purchase program.  However, I would tinker a little with the words prepared to for reasons somewhat similar to President Plossers. I think prepared to may convey too much intentionality. It could be interpreted as absolutely ready but holding off, or conceivably someone else might interpret it 
as inclined to but with some hesitancy at this stage.  I think it is, therefore, too ambiguous.  I would prefer signaling that the Committee holds open the option of such a program, and I would prefer those words over something like still evaluating.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B, as written.  I think it does accurately capture the sense of the discussion here.  There are probably other ways of capturing that sense, but for me that does the trick reasonably well.  I do think it provides us with ample flexibilityample leeway in the short runto pursue our objectives.  I dont worry much that it is going to unnecessarily constrain us in the next few months to do what we think we need to do.  So I find that all positive. Finally, I would avoid associating quantities with purchases of mortgage-backed securities and other things.  They seem arbitrary at this point, and I think paragraph 4, as written, conveys the message without putting in the numbers.  So I am pretty happy with it as it stands. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I submitted my recommendations in writing.  I am pleased with the way they were included. Basically, what I am hearing is that we should take alternative A and append paragraph 4 of alternative B and most parties would seem to be satisfied, at least those that are most worried and expressed themselves.  I will use President Yellen as an example, but as others did as well. With regard to that one sentence that is at the end of paragraph 3Moreover, the Committee sees some of risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth, et ceteraI think we offset that by the reference to help to preserve price stability at the very end. The reason I wanted that includedand I thank you for its being 
  includedis that it speaks from both sides of this.  We are not going to tolerate deflation, and we are aware of the fact that there are concerns that we are setting the stage for an inflationary backlash. So my recommendation is to use those first three paragraphs in alternative A and the last paragraph in alternative B.  I agree with the majority of the sentiment at this table. I would not have specific numbers.  My colleague to my left refers to that as crude.  I would say that it just puts a target on our chest, meaning that it gives the markets something to shoot at.  But if we dont deliver or somehow we are not interested in finally getting those numbers, we have basically set ourselves up for disappointing the marketplace. I would also, in the interest of being provocative but at the same time sensible, take President Bullards suggestion with a full heart.  I would take that first sentence and change it:  The Federal Open Market Committee will keep its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent, and I would put it as the second sentence in paragraph 4.  The fact is that we are focused on all of the rest. So it would read, The Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote the resumption of sustainable economic growth and to preserve price stability.  The 
FOMC will keep its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent.  The focusand the operative word is focusof the Committees policies, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So those are my recommendations there.  I would like to add one other point, Mr. Chairman, and that is when we talk about waiting to see what happens.  I think that is a very good point. We dont know what is going to come out from the fiscal side.  We dont know what is going to be proposed in terms of the Treasury.  President Stern made what I thought a sensible reference today not only to the aggregator bank but also perhaps to the need to close down some operations. I hope that we will bear that in mind. 
I would like to leave you with just a simple analogy.  In the medical field, the greatest costs are at the very end of life, the last year of life.  That is, certain that the sting of death will strike, we spend most of our medical expenses keeping someone alive, knowing that they are going to die. It seems to me that we are doing that with too many institutions.  You made a comment in our last conference call that you drew the line at the failure of Bank of America.  I think I understand you. But I would not draw the line at letting somebody fail, and I think we need to begin to work our way toward that in order to clear the air and deal with the issues in a forthright manner. That is a separate subject.  I have strayed too far. In summary, alternative A, the first three paragraphs, with paragraph 4 from B, and consider President Bullards grammatical change as sensible English.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My remark about Bank of America referred to a disorderly or uncontrolled failure.  Obviously an orderly wind-down that preserves stability is a different matter.  Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Maybe I will start with a note on the political economy before turning to the statement.  I had thought that we would know the situation was improved when the Fed was off the front pages.  I think we have been off the front pages not because the situation has improved but because the Treasury is taking over the front pages, and that is a good thing. So I feel pretty comfortable that we are finding ourselves slowly but surely into this weeks headlines that we are murky and they dont know.  I am not that encouraged, as I think about this statement for us, to try to make news if we dont have it.  The baton has been passed to a new Administration, and we should be cautious about stepping up before we know exactly where they are and before we know where we are.  That is just an instinct, which maybe pervades and suggests a preference for alternative B. 
  With respect to a couple of the items that have been debated on alternative B, Mr. Chairman, I would resist the suggestion that we import the sentence in section 3 of alternative A.  I prefer to keep it as is.  I would rather not, to the point made at the other end of the table, add on additional risk at this point in the public square.  My own sense is that the risks havent changed materially since we last met.  But adding that sentence suggests that somehow we are now acknowledging that they have, and at least to my mind it is not quite there.  Even though sometimes I also have an instinct to make the statement a confessional of sorts, I think it is dangerous for us to do that until the lust is outside our hearts, so to speak.  [Laughter] I had always been accused by someone who very recently sat at this table of temporizing.  But with his recent absence, I suggest that we temporize here on paragraph 3.  [Laughter] Though I think it is quite possible that we will include a sentence along the lines that President Yellen suggested, put me in the temporizing camp, but please dont tell him. So what does that mean? I like alternative B as written. Not to add to your burdens, but I am also uncomfortable with the way the sentence reads on the purchase of longer-term Treasury securities.  I read it and I think the markets would read it as that we have reached a decision.  The way it is written now is 
that we have reached the decision that we are likely to do it later.  I think that is not quite where we are. So given the position we are in, I would make the following minor edits, which I think change it a little. I would say, The Committee also is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securitiesnow I change a few words hereif circumstances were to evolve in a 
way that such transactions would be particularly effective, because, again, I think as written it says if evolving circumstances indicate.  I think they read that to say, We presume circumstances will be evolving, and we will take these actions.  I guess it may be more conditional and take us slightly out of the box in which we find ourselves.  So, again, my 
 suggestion would be, If circumstances were to evolve in a way that indicates that such transactions would be particularly effective, though I think it is ideal that we not find ourselves in the situation of pondering and debating in the public square.  Given where we are, I think that is the best alternative we can do at this moment.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. I just want to make an observation that, if we are going to have the economic projections come out at the same time, the public doesnt read the Greenbook, but it does look at our projections. Between now and October the inflation forecast will dramatically change. If we are doing the long-run projections at the same time, the biggest bar is going to be at 2 percent, and our forecast is going to say that virtually none of us thinks we will get there in three years. So in terms of being factually accurate, we should at least think about the implications of our economic projections coming out at the same time. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. To complicate this even further, on the one hand this would be a change from December, and there has not been a big change, in our view, since December.  On the other hand, Debbie points out to me that the minutes from the December meeting had exactly this sentence about inflationthat some members saw significant risks that inflation could decline and persist for a time at uncomfortably low levels, and then similar language that relates to being below the sustainable level, and so on.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I had a friendly amendment to Governor Warsh.  If evolving circumstances were to indicate seems more parsimonious.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. We are going to have to review all of these things in the end here. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I am marginally favoring A with B4 or B with A2 and 3. [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Lets go through that again. PARTICIPANT. But only marginally.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE. Marginally. I could be perfectly happy with B.  I think the difference is that it is not so much that we dont know yet that we are going to have to do something more.  It is 
that we dont know yet what that something more is likely to be.  The uncertainties that are in my mind and those that have been expressed are likely to be resolved by the time of our next meeting, such as the shape and the effect of the fiscal stimulus; the strategy for dealing with 
weaknesses in the banking system, including whether it is going to be additional capital injections, an aggregator bank, or nationalization; the pace of bank closures; and the strategy for dealing with distressed mortgages and foreclosures and, more important, our role in whatever that strategy is likely to be.  If our balance sheet is not required to take problem assets from the bank balance sheets, it may very well be required to provide loans for the subsequent purchases of either those assets or the underlying collateral.  Finally, with respect to commercial real estate, I think that we still need to investigate the structure of the commercial MBS and their 
relationship with servicers to see if we are going to have the same modification issues that we have had with residential mortgages.  So with all of those unknowns that are likely to be resolved in the short term, again, I am marginally happier with conveying the rationale for greater action but not yet identifying that action. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have been discussing whether we should embark on a long-term Treasury purchase program or whether we should 
   engage in a greater magnitude or duration of agency MBS purchases.  I am not sure these really are the next and best escalation options.  Not surprisingly, I agree with the staff memterm Treasuries, since I helped write it.  [Laughter]  I think the TALF expansion really is probably our next and best escalation option, but we are not prepared to do that quite at this time because we have to do that hand in hand with the Treasury.  So I want to agree with Governor Warsh that this is probably a time for temporizing. It seems clear to me that we do want to continue to expand our liquidity facilities, but to do so we have to satisfy a number of criteria.  I would argue that there are five criteria that any liquidity expansion should satisfy.  First, the market in question needs to be dysfunctional, and we might measure that by lack of liquidity, higher spreads, and lower volumes.  Two, the dysfunction has to be tightening financial conditions.  There needs to be a fairly direct link between the market in which we are intervening and economic activity.  Also, if there is a clear alternative source of funds, then intervention may not be warranted.  Third, we need to be confident that our facilities are likely to be helpful in improving market function and easing financial conditions. The goal should not be to displace markets but instead to provide support that primes markets to function better.  I think the CPFF is a good example in that respect.  Fourth, we need to be comfortable that we will indeed be secure to our satisfaction.  Fifth, we have to be comfortable that exit from these programs can be managed to avoid any conflict with our dual mandate. The TALF program, especially if the Treasury provides us with some support on the balance sheet exit issue, appears to fit best with these criteria. If the TALF works as anticipated in restarting the consumer ABS market and bringing down AAA-rated ABS spreads, then we may wish, with the Treasury as partner adding additional TARP capital, to broaden it to other 
 asset classes that are also in distress.  In particular, the CMBS market and the nonconforming RMBS market appear to be very good candidates.  It is not just the financing related to new activity that matters but also the ability for maturing debt to be refinanced.  This is a particularly important issue in both commercial real estate and nonconforming residential mortgage markets.  I believe the TALF program is very important because it provides three elements that are not broadly available to private investors right now(1) term funding, (2) leverage and balance sheet capacity, and (3) protection against tail risk.  The TALF would bypass banks and dealers and provide balance sheet capacity directly to risk capitalcapacity that today is unavailable because of the deleveraging that is taking place among banks and dealers and making them much less willing to extend such credit. It also provides protection against tail risk.  Because the financing is done on a nonrecourse basis, the most an investor can lose is the size of the haircut.  In this sense, although the TALF program is a lending program, one can also consider it to be a contingent purchase program.  In very bad states of the world in which AAA-rated consumer ABS tranches decline sharply in value, these securities will be put to the Federal Reserve and placed in an SPV capitalized by TALF money. The second issue I want to talk about is the exit issue.  Although I agree that this is a very important topic, I wonder how helpful it is to worry about this publicly, for two reasons.  First, anxiety expressed by us about the exit issue may fan fears that we will not be able to exit smoothly and avoid an inflation problem.  If market participants were broadly to share this opinion, the result could be higher risk premiums and tighter financial market conditions.  
Second, the more we express concern with exit and our balance sheet, the more we may alter expectations about how much we are willing to do to support the economy.  I think we should err on the side of reinforcing the message that the FOMC will do all it can to ease financial 
 conditions and stimulate the economy.  Worrying publicly about the balance sheet seems to undercut that goal to some degree.  At the same time, we should work aggressively to make sure that our balance sheet will not interfere with the appropriate conduct of monetary policy later, and we should clearly explain to the public our ability to do so. In terms of the statement, I prefer alternative B language generally, but I would suggest two alterations. In paragraph 2, the language that the outlook for the economy remains weak seems too mild to me and could be taken by market participants as sounding complacent.  I prefer the language from alternative A, which states that the economy has weakened somewhat more than anticipated, which I believe is factually correct and provides greater information about how the data are coming in relative to our forecast.  I also think it signals greater concern by the Committee about the outlook, which is where the Committee actually is in terms of 
thinking about policy going forward. The second alteration I would suggest in alternative B is where we are talking about the implementation of the TALF.  We say next month in alternative B.  Given that our ability to enact this program is subject to some degree to the Treasurys coming along with us in a timely fashion, I think it would be better to change next month to later this winter, which will give us until March 21, giving us a few more weeks.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That last thing worries me quite a bit.  I dont know. What did we have in December?    MR. LACKER. Later this season. 
MR. WARSH.  How about later? [Laughter] 
MR. LACKER. In the future. 
MR. MADIGAN. Another possibility might be just to say soon. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I thought of that as well, but does that satisfy you there, Vice Chairman? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think later this winter does provide an endpoint.  I am not sure how long soon is. MR. WARSH.  It is always winter somewhere.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We have a lot to go through here.  So just to get factual information here, my understanding from the staff was that we were well on track to implement during February, and I have heard nothing from the Treasury to indicate anything other than support for this program. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I think that is correct, although the Treasury right now is scrambling to get their new staff up and running.  So there is some risk that what had been agreed to by the old Treasury now needs to be sort of relitigated with the new Treasury.  That could delay our putting out a term sheet to market participants, which they really need to have several weeks ahead of time for this program to get up and operational.  I think there is a good chance that we are still going to be able to make February or certainly early March, but we probably want a bit of wiggle room there because we dont have complete control of the process. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are you okay with will soon implement? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes. I would prefer winter, but I can live with that.  Soon is factually correct. If we take a broad view of what soon meansyes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. Okay.  Brian, lets accept that one, unless President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Cant we just say, The Federal Reserve will be implementing? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Is that okay with everybody? 
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. To not specify it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  The Federal Reserve will be implementing.  Thank you, and thanks, everyone, for the useful comments.  Let me try to address a few other things here. I think we are very much in agreement on the substancethat we want to maintain an aggressive stance. I also would just say, as a general point, that I fully agreeand I am sure everyone doesthat we want to look for better metrics and better ways of communicating and expressing.  As a general invitation to all of you and your staffs, you dont have to wait until the next meeting, and you dont have to wait until the week before the next meeting.  We are delighted to hear explicit proposals for metrics or communication or statements that you would like to circulate, and we can discuss throughout the entire intermeeting period.  There is no need for us to wait until the last minute.  So let me just encourage you to follow through with that, and let us see your proposals. There have been a number of suggestions.  In the spirit of temporizing, I do believe that, although we want to convey our concern about the economy and our willingness to be aggressive with policy, there really is a high likelihood that we will learn a great deal in the next intermeeting period about what the Treasury will be proposing, what the Congress will be proposing, and what our role will best be fitting into those overall ideas.  Therefore, hearing you, I am a bit reluctant to commit at this moment to a specific increase in either our GSE or our Treasury purchase program.  Perhaps we should have made more explicit yesterday what our 
plan was going to be. So I would prefer to maintain the optionality of alternative B, which talks about standing ready both to expand the GSE program and to purchase Treasuries under the appropriate circumstances, and I will come back to that. 
  The second set of suggestions had to do with the characterization of the economy and inflation. There are two in particular.  One was whether to characterize the economy as weak or weakened somewhat more than anticipated.  I am actually a little surprised to hear the support for weaker than anticipated in that the Greenbook has not really changed much since December and the thrust of the commentary was that things were weak but not much weaker than anticipated. I am in your hands.  I am going to be taking some straw votes in a few minutes, so this is just a question. My sense on that one is that I could consider different language, but it seems as though the outlook remains weak conveys our view.  I am not sure that I have heard that the outlook itself has changed significantly since our last meeting.  That was my sense, but I am willing to be instructed on that.  On the statement about inflation being below the level consistent with economic growth and price stability, a number of people suggested that.  I think I am okay with that.  It was introduced in the minutes.  What I am going to do in a minutelet me just warn youis take a couple of straw votes, and I will ask all participants to tell me whether you would like to add that sentence or not. I dont know any other way to resolve this, since I personally think we could go either way. Other issuesI think it is a very interesting suggestion to move the material about the federal funds rate into paragraph 4.  I wish that you had sent that in a week ago so we could have thought about it. I think it makes sense, but I guess at the last minute here I am a bit anxious about making that big a change in the structure of our statement.  But I reiterate our interest in hearing proposals for statements throughout the intermeeting period. On the issue about Treasuriesit is difficult in both directions.  President Plosser raises the question about raising a possibility and then not doing it, which is certainly an issue.  On the other hand, we have also been criticized for calling audibles on the line at the last minute and 
    surprising people. So it is difficult.  Based on the discussion and on things that President Lacker said, and so on, I think it is in fact a possibility that we would take this route.  I personally think that we shouldnt rule it out.  It is not something we want to undertake yet because we certainly want to find out what the other options are going to be in terms of the other things that the Treasury is proposing and so on. MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, on that pointit does concern me that this is a bit of a conundrum about how we do the statements, but I would be more comfortable with the language that Governor Warsh suggested, which gives a little more conditionality to it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I was diagramming that sentence.  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER. I am sorry.  I didnt even write it down.  It just sounded better. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, as simplified by President Lacker, it was is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities, if evolving circumstances were to indicate that such transactions would be particularly effective.  I think thats three subjunctives.  [Laughter] MR. WARSH.  I think the Lacker suggestion is if circumstances were to indicate that. MR. LACKER. Right. Oh, I didnt take out evolving, but I am indifferent on that.  Evolving seems to emphasize CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But see, the purpose of evolving is the sense thatdont you want to convey the optionality that this is going to take place and will be evaluated over time? The word evolving suggests an ongoing process. MR. WARSH.  The delta is, Are the evolving circumstances going to evolve as we presume, in which case we have pre-committed to it?  Or is our decision going to be based on whether the evolving circumstances change in one way, which then triggers our yes? 
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, Governor Warsh, there is an if here.  I mean, that certainly implies that our action is conditional on certain things happening that may or may not happen. MR. WARSH.  May I use a life line? [Laughter]  Brian, do you read it, as written, to say that we have reached a decision and our decision is contingent upon facts of the world in the future or that we have reached a decision and, if the world proceeds as we expect it will, then we will do this?  I am not sure I picked up from your introduction which you think you and markets would read. MR. MADIGAN. I read this as saying that we dont know how the circumstances will evolve, but if they evolve in the way that indicates that this would be particularly helpful, then we are prepared to purchase. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, for example, one possible theory would be that we will respond only if there is a big backup in rates and that seems to be an effective approach.  That would be an example of evolving circumstances.  My guess isthough it is always foolish to make guessesthat this will be viewed as slightly negative news, not positive news, for the Treasury market.  We will have to see. MR. WARSH.  I would say that Treasury markets are sort of 50/50 on when we are going to go forward. So this is really the question: Does it go 55/45 or vice versa? It is hard to know. I think the sense is that the more they read the if to be an if, the more conditional it is and the more consensus there is around the table, Mr. Chairman.  So it is really just whether we think that there is sufficient conditionality as written or whether the LackerWarsh thing adds to the conditionality. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I fear that taking out evolving actually reduces the clarity because evolving implies an ongoing process.  Without the word evolving, it suggests that we are still evaluating the current situation and then trying to assess whether the conditions are met to take the action.  President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, the action words are prepared to purchase.  Are we going to maintain those in there, or would we change it, keep evolving, and put will consider purchasing? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, we already have a number of subjunctives. MR. FISHER. I think it is the prepared to purchase that indicates a decision made, and that is the phrase that bothers me. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One reason that I was comfortable with this language was that I do think that we will not be maintaining the world in suspended animation indefinitely.  We will have much more clarity, I believe, by the next meeting, and at the next meeting we would be able to say something like the Federal Reserve will be focusing its attention on X, Y, 
or Z. MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I think putting the particularly in there actually steps us back a little, despite the is prepared to.  It is an if clause already.  I dont see how if circumstances were to indicate is different from if evolving circumstances indicate, particularly with the particularly in there. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And I dont want to pull back completely because I do think there is a realistic possibilityand I realize that there are different viewsthat it is going to 
evolve over time.  We still have a lot of discussion and further thinking to do, not only about the 
specific types of purchases and programs but also about how we are going to evaluate the overall thrust of policy, and so on. MR. WARSH.  To conflate game shows, I dont want to be voted off the island.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Have I addressed the major questions? I dont know. Okay.  What I would like to do is propose alternative B with two issues that we will now take a straw vote on.  The one change we have agreed on so far is the Federal Reserve will be implementing the TALF.  The other two possible changes have to do with the characterization 
of the economy. The first one would be in B2, to replace the first sentence with the first sentence from A2, suggests that the economy has weakened somewhat more than anticipated. MR. EVANS. Mr. Chairman, it is the anticipated.  Couldnt we just say, The economy has weakened further? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, there is a distinction between the outlook and the economy itself.  The outlook remains weak. MR. EVANS. In this case, it doesnt say outlook. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Well, do you want to say, The economy has weakened somewhat further?   MR. EVANS. That would be okay with me. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto, do you have a view? MS. PIANALTO. That sounds fine. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. How about suggests that the economy has weakened further? MR. KOHN. What do we have about the outlook then? 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No one seemed to object to the last sentence, which gives a recovery but with downside risks. MR. KOHN. But it doesnt have a sense that the outlook is weak until that recovery.  I have to think about this. The outlook remains weak, and there is CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think weakened further is not dangerous. MR. KOHN. Okay. So its the economy rather than the outlook that has weakened further. MR. EVANS. It is as mild as saying we have stepped from the fourth quarter into the first quarter, which is going to be a contraction. MR. LACKER. Im sorry.  I missed whats on the table.  Is it that the economy has weakened further or that the outlook has weakened further? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The economy. MR. LACKER. The economy.  Okay. That makes sense. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So I hear a slight preference forokay, Brian suggests that the economy has weakened further. All right. The last question, then, is whether or not to add or replace B3 with A3.  That would add the sentence that the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability.  I propose to take a straw vote of all of the participantsnot just members but participants.  All those in favor of making the change?  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.  All opposed?  One, two, three, four, five, six. All right. I think it is a reasonable change.  I dont think it is dramatic.  Any other comments? 
 All right. I guess we have made three changes now.  I propose alternative B. I think it conveys the sense of the Committee.  It maintains, as much as possible, our optionality while suggesting that we are going to be aggressive.  Again, we will be looking both to the Treasury and to the government for their actions over the next intermeeting period.  Once again, I invite members and other participants to submit their suggestions for communication and measurement over the intermeeting period. I probably should mention that there will be opportunities for us to communicate about our views further. In particular, I have a testimony on February 10 on our transparency and our communication. I have a speech at the National Press Club, which will have more of a press conference type of flavor, sort of between a speech and a press conference, on February 18.  Then, I have the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings, followed by Budget Committee hearings, so you will be seeing a lot of me on television.  My complexion is not usually green but probably will be 
by then. [Laughter] So we will have a chance to communicate.  And I hope that each of you, in your own speeches and other interactions with the public, will take as much of the opportunity as you can to try to explain what we are doing, how we are thinking about the economy, and how we are thinking about our policy in this unusual environment.  Any other comments? President Fisher. MR. FISHER. I just want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the spirit in which we have conducted these conversations in this meeting.  As you know, at least of some of us felt that we might be disenfranchised.  You may be enfranchising us too much.  [Laughter] But we appreciate it.  At least speaking for myself, I want to thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. All right. If we are ready for a roll call vote. MS. DANKER. Would you like me to read the statement, as amended? 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why dont you? MS. DANKER. Okay. The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent.  The Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.   Information received since the Committee met in December suggests that the economy has weakened further. Industrial production, housing starts, and employment have continued to decline steeply, as consumers and businesses have cut back spending.  Furthermore, global demand appears to be slowing significantly.  Conditions in some financial markets have improved, in part reflecting government efforts to provide liquidity and strengthen financial institutions; nevertheless, credit conditions for households and firms remain extremely tight.  The Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in economy activity will begin later this year, but the downside risks to that outlook are significant.   In light of the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities in recent months and the prospects for considerable economic slack, the Committee expects that inflation pressures will remain subdued in coming quarters.  Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that 
inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term.   The Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote the resumption of sustainable economic growth and to preserve price stability.  The focus of the Committees policy is to support the functioning of financial markets and stimulate the economy through open market operations and other measures that are likely to keep the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet at a high level. The Federal Reserve continues to purchase large quantities of 
           agency debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets, and it stands ready to expand the quantity of such purchases and the duration of the purchase program as conditions warrant.  The Committee also is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities if evolving circumstances indicate that such transactions would be particularly effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.  The Federal Reserve will be implementing the term asset-backed securities loan facility to facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses.  The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the Federal Reserves balance sheet in light of evolving financial market 
developments and to assess whether expansions of or modifications to lending facilities would serve to further support credit markets and economic activity and help to preserve price stability. This vote will also encompass the directive from page 48 of the Bluebook.   Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke Yes President Evans Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  A couple of other small items.  Item 11 is the longer-run projections.  Many of you commented.  I heard no concerns about it, so why dont we go ahead andPresident Lacker. MR. LACKER. I pointed out yesterday that the distribution of the numbers for inflation had shifted notably. I understand that peoples views about the appropriate inflation ratethe steady-state inflation rate that they would put in a Taylor rule or some other reaction function 
   might change from quarter to quarter.  I also pointed out that I thought the motivation for doing that was dissatisfaction with the extent to which the third year of our forecast inflation changed from quarter to quarter and that it diminished the extent to which that report of our forecasts served as a proxy for our Committees agreed-upon numerical inflation objectives.  At our last meeting, we discussed adopting an explicit numerical inflation objective.  That hasnt appeared on the agenda today. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I was about to report. 
MR. LACKER. Oh, okay. I guess my attitude toward the longer-run projections is that I remain unconvinced, as I was in our October discussion, that the benefits exceed the costs, and I wanted to use the opportunity here to ask about the status of adopting a numerical objective for inflation. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree with you that this has disadvantages and advantages relative to a formal target.  Absolutely. I wanted to thank everybody for the very useful discussion that we had in the videoconference, and I promise not to have a full discussion of inflation targets any time soon because I do think we do have a pretty good sense of peoples views. What I took from the conference call, among other things, was that the Committee was willing to grant me some discretion to try to discuss with the political bodies what their views would be on going forward with an explicit objective.   As I mentioned to you even before the meeting, I had spoken to the Administration, and I have had some follow-up discussions there.  My sense is that there would not be any serious opposition from that side, although I need to continue to talk with them.  But the more difficult question is on the congressional side, and I have a meeting with Barney Frank on Monday, in which I will raise this issue among other issues.  My sense of the meeting was that it was worth 
   doing some socializing and some exploring of these issues but that we wanted to be very careful and very sensitive at this difficult juncture about not creating new political problems for ourselves but only if we can persuade the leaders of the country that this is something constructive.  So I will continue to try to do that and continue to work on this.  I do think, frankly, that this continued expansion of our projections actually makes it much easier to sell because it creates a context in which the Congress can see that this is only part of a program that involves meeting both parts of our mandate. MR. LACKER. I see. Mr. Chairman, do you view it as feasible, likely, or very unlikely that consultations could result in your Monetary Policy Report to the Congress this season involving a revelation of an objective? Or is that too much to hope for? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont know.  I will have to see. It will depend a lot on the reaction I get from a few key people. MR. LACKER. Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, did you have a comment? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes. I guess I am somewhat less than fully enthusiastic about publishing long-term projections at this time.  I could support it, but I just want to make a couple of points. First, I think it is a somewhat awkward time to introduce long-term projections. Our forecasts are almost certainly going to be very wrong, given the level of uncertainty. Moreover, long-term projections may be viewed by market participants as off point.  
The economy is sinking rapidly, yet the FOMC is spending its time constructing forecasts for 
2011 and beyond. Second, if the goal is to introduce long-term projections to communicate the Committees views about parameters such as the NAIRU, the potential growth rate, and the desired level of 
 inflation, wouldnt it be better to simply proceed and publish those mterm projections, which are just an approximation of those parameters? Third, I think the individual long-term projections are difficult to link back to the projections for 2011.  If one of the primary objectives of the long-term projections is to provide some background for how the projections past 2011 will converge to the Committees goals, you might want to consider different ways of constructing the central tendency forecast. Fourth, I worry a little about what happens when the composition of the FOMC changes.  The long-term projections that result might change because of changes in the composition, not because of an underlying change in view by individual members.  I think it would be hard for market participants to know how to judge those changes over time, quarter to quarter, as the projections evolve. So I can support it, but I am not enthusiastic. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you for that.  Again, I think we see that there are both advantages and disadvantages of doing this.  I guess I would disagree only slightly on the issue of timing in that, to the extent that this does give some sense of what the Committees 
preferences are on appropriate monetary policy over the longer term, certainly an issue that has come around the table quite a bit is the need to stabilize inflation expectations in a situation where they might be quite potentially unstable in either direction.  So that is one consideration. President Evans. MR. EVANS. May I make just one quick point?  President Lacker mentioned that there was some concern about changes in the inflation long-term projection on a quarter-to-quarter basis. I dont interpret the distribution that way.  It seems to me as though it was probably importantly influenced by our discussion at the videoconference, and it was a one-off type of 
  change. I know I changed my forecast from 1 to 2 percent.  I had previously felt constrained that 1 was pretty much a Committee consensus midpoint, and so I figured we would be acting that way. But now, with more people thinking it was 2, that was how I changed it.  I get a sense that others around the table may have done the same thing. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It seemed to be noted that the mode is 2, and so the majority believe that 2 is the right number, and there are arguments for allowing a slightly higher target given the recent experience. Other comments about the projections or inflation targets?  Well, with the caveats that were raised, I still believe that there was a general view that we ought to go ahead with the longer-term projections as part of the summary that will be published along with the minutes.  So why dont we do that. I have updated you on inflation targets, which is still really at just the discussion stage. Let me just ask you quicklythis was our first experiment with the somewhat modified meeting structureeither now or in the intermeeting period, give us your feedback or comments about the effectiveness of this structure.  Also, if we are going to have an issue in a one-day context, we are going to have find ways to condense parts of the discussion some way or another, perhaps by sending out materials in advance.  Is there anyone who would like to comment at this point about the meeting structure or make suggestions?  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. I wonder if we should have two-day meetings until we get into a more status quo situation. Rather than shortening the meetings, I think it was actually quite productive to have the discussion.  We might want to think about whether two-day meetings, until we get more clarity as to what policy should be going forward, would be helpful. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that a widespread view?  All right. We will investigate.  We will make sure that it works with peoples schedules and see if it is feasible.  But I agree that 
 it would be very difficult to do what we did in this meeting in one day.  Other comments or feedback? All right. Hearing none, the next meeting is Tuesday, March 17.  Thats St. Patricks Day, isnt it? Very nice. [Laughter] We have a lunch available.  There is no briefing planned, so our work is done. I hope you will have a safe trip through the weather back to your home cities. Thank you very much. END OF MEETING 
             
  
 
 Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on February 7, 2009 A joint conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held on Friday, February 7, 2009, at 10:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Luecke, Assistant SecretaryMr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Weinberg, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate Economists 
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open Market Account Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
        Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ms. Liang, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Mr. Nelson, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Mr. Fuhrer, Ms. George, and Mr. Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City, and Dallas, respectively Messrs. Rasche and Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Cleveland, respectively 
    Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on February 7, 2009 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A good Saturday morning to everybody.  Thank you for joining this meeting.  This is going to be a joint FOMCBoard meeting because, although I do not anticipate we will be taking any formal action today, I do want to give everyone the opportunity to express views and to discuss policy issues.  With that said, I need a motion to close the meeting. MR. KOHN. So moved. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  The Board is in session as well as the FOMC. Let me just welcome Governor Tarullo, who is joining us in his first meeting.  He has been here working for about a week and is already contributing to discussions at the Board.  The purpose of the meeting today is for me to discuss with you the Treasurys proposed financial stabilization plan and, in particular, the Feds proposed role in that overall structure.  This is a close hold. There have been a number of leaks, as often happens, which is very 
counterproductive; but I think the Fed has done well, and I would not like those leaks to come from the Fed.  So I appreciate your keeping your confidence close. We have been discussing, and by we I mean primarily the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the OCC, the last week or sowith a lot of staff work before thata plan that Secretary Geithner will propose on Monday at 12:30 in a speech at the Treasury.  They have been very wide-ranging discussions, and, frankly, there was little in the way of resolution or focus until very recentlyonly in the last 24 hours or so have we begun to see where Secretary 
Geithner wants to take the plan; in fact, we got a very substantial revision of the document this morning at 9:15, so you can see this is very much a work in progress. 
     But given the schedule for Secretary Geithner to announce the plan on Monday, I thought this was an opportune point for us to review the plan and the Feds potential role.  As youll see when I go through the plan with you, the details are fairly lacking.  There is an overall structure.  That, in part, is on purpose. The political strategy is to provide an overall structure with some  detail, but not a great deal of detail, with the idea that the public discussion and the congressional discussion will create some buy-in on the political side.  Its like selling a car: Only when the customer is sold on the leather seats do you actually reveal the price. So the strategy, again, is to provide the framework to get the Congress involved within certain parameters, and then, only when there is some consensus on how the plan will work and what the key elements will be, to negotiate whether additional funding beyond $350 billion is necessary.  But I think there are some advantages to that from a political point of view.  I will say that both I and the staffBill Dudley and othersare somewhat concerned, at least given the way things stand now, about the market reaction. First, the lack of details will create some uncertainty and concern, particularly because theres not a great deal said about the problem children, the BAC and Citi.  Secondly, I think the markets will be disappointed in the following sense: As I will describe, this is a real truth-telling kind of plan.  Its fundamentalist.  Its not about giving the banks a break.  Its not about using accounting principles to give them back-
door capital. Its very much market-oriented and tough love.  And I think we all will like that. I like that. But the banks shareholders arent going to be thrilled about it. As I will explainand Ill go through this whole thing in detail in just a minutethe Feds role in the bank stabilization plan per se is minimal.  We may be called upon to do some transition or bridge-financing of parts of the aggregator bank concept to a more permanent, non-Fed financing, but were not involved in any wraps or anything like that, so in the broad 
  elements of the bank stabilization plan, we are pretty much on the sidelines.  Where we are part of the overall stabilization plan is in a proposed expansion of the TALF to include additional types of ABS.  An important element of that would be that the Treasury will be proposing legislative action to ensure that we can sterilize the effects of any expansion of our balance sheet on bank reserves; and that would be, I think, a condition for us to fully meet the size of the 
expansion that they want. Ill come back to that in detail, but that, essentially, is where the Feds role is visualized.  Let me go ahead now and go through the plan.  Ill talk about the overall plan.  Ill talk about the Feds role. Ill give you some reasons why I think the Feds role is appropriate for the economy and advances our own narrow institutional interests.  Then we will take all the comments and questions that you would like to make.  Again, because this is a meeting, voicing 
your views is certainly appropriate. The first element of the stabilization plan is summarized as enhanced transparency about asset valuations and capital needs. So theres a principle here that I believe to be very important:  The more disclosure and clarity there is, the less uncertainty there is and the better the chance that well come to some kind of stability. One part of this first element will be a coordinated supervisory scrub of at least the top 20 banks or so to ensure that we understand how they are valuing their assets.  We want to find some consistency in their marks, we want to find consistency in their provisioning, and we want to go beyond provisioning, which is focused on one-year losses, to look at expected losses beyond one year. So were going to do a tough scrub of the balance sheets.  Were going to require enhanced disclosure so that there will be as much information as possible, with as much consistency as possible, about the balance sheets of the banks. 
 Another part of this element is that this is going to be a forward-looking exercise.  In particular, the standard Basel II regulatory capital standards are to some extent going to be subsumed in the following sense:  There will be either explicitly or implicitly an analysis of bank balance sheets based not only on the current expectations or current modal forecasts, but on a stress scenario as well. And the presumption is that banks will have enough capital that they will be able to meet regulatory standards even in the stress scenario; that means there will be some presumption of a capital buffernot a permanent increase in capital standards, but rather a temporary increase in capital required that could be run down over time in order to meet the standards even in a period of extreme stress. The language of the presentation will be something along the lines that we want to be sure that our most important and largest banks, at least, and all of those banks are going to be resilient, even in the case of a very bad macroeconomic outcome.  A forward-looking approach gets around the accounting issues about reserving versus marking to market, and well be very aggressive in terms of trying to get a proactive capital injection.  Theyll use this scenario to size the capital needs of particularly the top 20-25 banks, and, moreover, we will be looking not strictly at Basel II standards, as I said, but also at market-relevant standards, like TCE to total assets, as well as the Basel risk-weighted asset standards.  So Step 1 is a scrub for consistency and an evaluation of the ability of banks to meet capital standards even in a bad scenario in the future. The second element of the bank program is a capital facility.  Of course, the first line of defense, to the extent that banks can, is accessing private capital markets, and theyll be strongly encouraged to do so. Obviously, that is very difficult except for a very few banks, so there will be a backup U.S. government capital facility.  What appears to be now the most likely form of 
   capital is a convertible preferred instrument, which could be put in as preferred but converted to common as needed to meet the well-capitalized standard of 3 percent of risk-weighted assets for common equity. I think about this as like an initial margin versus a maintenance margin.  The initial margin you can think of as being 4 percent, either common or convertible preferred, which would be enough common or implicit common to meet the bad scenario.  Thats the initial margin.  The maintenance margin, though, is 3 percent common.  Going forward, as the amount of common slips below 3 percent, then the banks will be forced to convert their preferred stock into common stock to maintain that common ratio of at least 3 percent; 3 and 4 percent are not the exact numbersthese numbers will be calibrated by these exercises looking at the scenarios.  Again, this is focused primarily on the largest institutions, the top 22 or so, which are the ones above $100 billion, but all banks would be eligible to take this common should they so desire.  Again, the purpose is to capitalize banks in a forward-looking way so that they are able to withstand severe scenarios, and to focus more on common.  I should add that I believe that the assumption is that even the existing preferredthe preferred that was injected under the first TARP roundwould be changed to convertible, so that the initial TARP could be converted into common as needed. We discussed at great length methods of taking bad assets off of bank balance sheets or insuring them.  There are a lot of problems with these.  Theres a sense that we need to do that but a lot of concern, in particular, about how to price, because too low a price will not attract any interest and too high a price will be a subsidy from the taxpayer.  There was also a general preferenceputting aside the accounting issues and so on, which are very importantfor an aggregator bank, which takes assets off the balance sheets, as opposed to a ring fence or a 
   guarantee, which provides downside risk protection but doesnt clean the assets off of the banks balance sheet. So the current plan is to have an aggregator bank with initial capacity up to about $500 billion, which is lowpotentially its expandable.  The way it would be run would be as a public-private partnership. Im speaking roughlyI dont have all the exact detailsbut the basic idea would be that there would be bidding by the private sector for the right to participate.  The bids would reflect the amount of capital that the private sector agents were willing to contribute. The instrument that would be created would be a bank that would have both public and private capital. Regarding the funding, as I said, the Fed might place some initial bridge-
financing to get the thing up and going initially, but in very short order the idea is that the funding would be through FDIC-insured liabilities, so the Fed would not be involved in any sustained way in this organization. The government would give the bank instructions about broad asset classes to purchase, and theres some debate about this.  There was some discussion about whether the asset purchases had to come from banks or not, or were just general.  I think right now were leaning 
towards restricting it to assets that are on bank balance sheets.  But the asset price and purchase decisions would be made by the private sector with the profit motive guiding them; and the idea would be that this would avoid concerns about overpayment and would be an effective mechanism for price revelation and price discovery in these markets.  So the third element would be the aggregator bank.  Again, I think that will be viewed as very small, and banks will be 
disappointed about the pricing mechanism, which will not be some kind of subsidy to them; but it does have the advantage of being a market-based, truth-telling type of mechanism. 
  The fourth element is an extension of the FDIC programthe temporary liquidity guarantee program.  The current plan is to extend it from July to October, a three-month extension, and perhaps to expand the cap, as well. The FDIC is also very eager to introduce a covered bond-type program, which would allow banks to finance for up to ten years on a heavily collateralized basis along the lines that we see in Europe, for example; and those covered bonds would be FDIC-guaranteed as well. This capital process is going to end up with substantial government minority shares, at the least, in many large banks and majority shares in a few.  So a very difficult and important question is: How are we going to manage that?  We dont want to do it in a way that destroys the company, or destroys the franchise value, but, at the same time, we have to accept the reality of government ownership.  The proposal from the Treasury is to set up an independent body called a Government Investment Board, the fifth element in the plan.  The Government Investment Board would control all the shares, including not only the preferred but also the common shares that are invested in the banks and manage them from a wealth-maximization point of view.  It also would be involved in setting guidelines, perhaps according to the share of ownership, for bank dividend policy, compensation policy, governance, and so on.  So you can imagine the situationin particular for a couple of banks we have in mindwhere the government would have majority ownership:  The bank would become subject to tough dividend and compensation restrictions, and the Government Investment Board, together with the supervisory authorities, 
would direct the bank in terms of issues like changing management, changing business plans, and so on. It would not be the government running the bank, but, in cases where the government has a high ownership share, it would assert those rights in the way that a supervisory authority 
  would. There will be an explicit objective to return ownership to the private sector as soon as possible, consistent with maintaining financial stability.  Sixth and finally, on the bank conditions, the President has already indicated some stronger conditions on lending and executive compensation.  For lending there would beand I will just quote the languagebanks would indicate a commitment to increase lending above a baseline, consistent with safety and soundness.  They would provide detailed information about their lending on a monthly basis, as well as a qualitative description of the lending environment.  So this is an attempt to finesse the difficulties of measuring lending against an 
unknown baseline, but there will be some reporting requirements that will try to satisfy the 
political need to say the banks are making efforts to lend.  This is obviously a very difficult issue 
and one in which the supervisors will have to play a role, because well have to help mediate issues about when banks should be lending more and when we think that doing so is not consistent with safety and soundness.  As already indicated, there will be stronger executive compensation restrictions.  They are contemplating a dividend holidayrestricting dividends at 
all participants to one cent, at least for 2009.  Finally, there would continue to be a distinction between banks voluntarily participating and those that are required to participate or are receiving exceptional support, in which case the dividend and compensation and other restrictions would be correspondingly tougher. So thats the broad nature of the plan. Its got forward-looking capital. Its got convertible capital. Its got a Government Investment Board to manage that common stock.  Its got conditions on the banks. It has a private-public aggregator bank. As I said, I think that will be somewhat disappointing to the market, and I hope that the Treasury will at least clarify in greater detail something about how to deal with the banks that 
 will almost immediately become government majority-owned.  But there are still 48 hours to go, and, given the past experience, thats enough time  for at least four major changes in the program. Now to the Federal Reserve role.  The Federal Reserves principal role in this will be an expansion of the TALF, the asset-backed securities loan facility.  There will be a joint announcement of an agreement between the Treasury and the Fed to expand the TALF from its current planned level of $200 billion to potentially as high as $1 trillion.  The expansion will take place over timebased on learning, based on Fed managementbut I think it will be made explicit, as weve already done, that we will be considering, besides the assets we are already looking at, ABS that include CMBS and private-label RMBS, which would include prime jumbo mortgages. The initial plan for this expansion had the Fed program taking legacy assets.  We have pushed back against that very hard, and we have gotten agreement that, as with the current TALF, the expanded TALF would take only newly securitized and newly rated ABS, not legacy assets. So we will not be involved in the aggregator bank or in the toxic asset removal process.  I will note, just for clarity, that not all the assets themselves will be new; for example, in the case of commercial real estate, some of the underlying assets are existing buildings.  But the securitizations and the ratings will be fresh; so that will reduce our risk, and, of course, the risk also is reduced substantially by the Treasury element. Legally, in order for the TARP scoring to work in a favorable way, this has to be a Federal Reserve facility.  So it will be a Federal Reserve facility.  We will be the lead agency.  We will be in charge of developing the program.  We will have final say on the decisions with respect to the assets to be taken, the rate of expansion, the scale of expansion, and so on.  I think 
  this is very important, and it will be clear that the Fed is autonomous and controlling its own balance sheet. Finally, as I already mentioned, as part of this, very importantly, and as an explicit part of the announcements that Tim Geithner will make on Monday, the Treasury will propose to the Congress legislative changes that will allow the Fed to sterilize the implications of all of our lending, not just the TALF lending, on bank reserves and the money supply.  So if that is done, that will be a major gain for us in terms of our concerns about macroeconomic stability. Im going to give you an opportunity in just a few minutes to comment and ask questions, but let me just say that this has gone through a lot of discussion and negotiation, and I can personally argue that I think that where the TALF and the Feds role is now is good for the economy and is good for the Fed.  On the economy, clearly, any understanding of whats 
happening in financial markets and the banking system has to recognize that one of the big problems is the shutdown of the securitization markets.  Getting the banks lending again is all well and good, but there are limits to that.  There needs to be additional lending capacity.  We need to get the securitization markets going again.  We are facing some very specific issues that were discussed at the FOMC meeting, like the upcoming crunch in commercial real estate finance. I think that this TALF programalthough, again, we want to reserve the right to see how it works and to make changes and so onis addressing a very important problem. And at this point, it would be doing so in a very broad-based way, because it will be covering a whole range of different kinds of assets; and the notion that were somehow focusing on very narrow sets of assets would not be legitimate.  I think this is good for the economy.  I think it will be an important complement and perhaps one of the most powerful elements of this plan.  And as we 
think about ways to use our balance sheet to stimulate the economy and ease financial 
  conditions, I think this is a very promising direction, consistent with stabilization of the banking system more broadly. Looking at this from the Feds perspective, just to reiterate, I think this is good for our institutional objectives. First of all, it respects Fed autonomy.  This is a joint project. As I indicated, the Fed will take the lead in decisions about expansion and assets.  We will not be taking legacy assets, and we will not be participating in wraps or running an aggregator bank.  Those were some of the objectives, in terms of things that we wanted to stay away from, that I talked about at the last meeting, and we will not be involved in them. Secondly, I think this overall is a very good step in the direction of protecting our balance sheet. For one thing, there is the Treasurys contribution:  Our analysis of the first $200 billion of the TALF suggests that the $20 billion and 10 percent capital from the Treasury provide extremely good protection against any credit risk, so that we see very, very little risk of any credit losses to the Fed. For another thing, from a liquidity perspective, there is the very important step for the Treasury to support legislation to help us drain excess reserves. There have been various discussions about the need for congressional approval, input, and so on. That will come, beginning with my testimony on Tuesday, which is on our use of our 13(3) authorities and a discussion of our role in bank rescues, et cetera, and in which I will, among other things, be saying that if theres a good resolution regime in place, we will be very comfortable with an accord that takes us out of that business.  But more broadly, this whole plan will be presented to the Congress, including the TALF.  We will get their feedback and their views, and in particular, they will have to take positive action on the reserve-draining mechanism 
for us to be able to undertake the TALF on the scale that has been described. 
  So I think this is positive. It moves us in the direction of the objectives I set forth at the FOMC meeting about where we want to go in terms of an accord.  And I would add that, in working closely with the Treasury on these important matters and developing a good relationship, I think we increase the odds of getting cooperation in other areas were concerned about, including removal of the SPVs from our balance sheet.  And let me just say, on a very preliminary and close-hold basis, that I have also had some rather encouraging discussions with both the Treasury and the Congress on an inflation objective, and I think that also would be something I would want to preserve as we develop a good relationship with the Treasury. Ive spoken for quite a while.  Let me stop now, and the rest of the meeting will just be your questions and your comments. Does anyone have any comments or question, Board or Presidents?  I see President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Can you elaborate on how the sterilization is likely to be done?  Will there be an expansion of the SFP or will we be issuing our own bills? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The language on Monday would be that the Treasury will be pushing legislation to achieve this objectiveit will not specify.  I believe their preference would be to do it through the financing bills, but there will be two important improvements over 
the existing program.  One is that it will be explicitly outside the debt limit; so there would be no 
constraints from the debt limit in terms of their ability to help us sterilize the balance sheet.  Secondly, there would have to be a clear understanding that this was at the discretion of the Fed and not the Treasury; that is, the Treasury could not withhold a reasonable request from the Fed to provide those bills. President Fisher. 
   MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for the briefing.  On the expansion of the TALF, is there a first-loss guarantee from the Treasury as we had before under the $200 billionthe $20 billion for the $200 billion? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, staff members have worked through the details for the first $200 billion very carefully.  They have developed haircuts for the various types of assets based on generous allowances for risk of loss. And then, of course, we have the $20 billion of capital. The result that has been presented to me is that, for midrange haircutswhich are more generous than what the market is offering now but would be punitive under normal timeswe see the risks to the Federal Reserve from the credit as being extraordinarily low. Going forward, we would have the same process.  The Treasury would provide capital. The haircuts would be set by some systematic process.  I dont absolutely guarantee that the capital ratio would be 10 to 1, but whatever ratio it is would be set based on the presumption that with virtual certainty there would be no losses to the Federal Reserve. MR. FISHER. So its a moving thing.  In other words, we dont know whatever first-loss guarantee we might require?  Thats an open door for us? Or you do not think it is going to be necessary? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There will be Treasury capital. The question is just, how much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There will definitely be Treasury capital.  Will it be 10 to 1?  You know, there are a number of parameters:  Theres the size of the haircut, theres the variability in the loss rates and the different assets that we consider, and then theres the capital.  We can trade off among those things.  Suppose we learn, for example, in the first round that the 
haircuts were providing are in some sense too generous and that we get tremendous demand for 
    this lending. Then in the second round we could consider some tradeoff between bigger haircuts and lower capital. But in any case, it would be thoroughly vetted by the Board staff and the New York Fed and others to give us comfort that the risk of loss to the Federal Reserve is extremely low. In fact, under the current parameters, the risk of loss to the Treasury appears to be quite low; and theres $20 billion ahead of us.  So the basic principlethat there will be enough capital and sufficiently large haircuts to essentially eliminate any realistic risk of credit loss will be preserved.  MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I just have two other questionsthese are data point questions. Internally, what kind of leverage do we expect to see realized on that $1 trillion? That is, how much do we think the financial community will leverage that facility? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you want to help, Bill? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, the haircuts on the existing program are slightly below 10 percent on average for the consumer asset-backed securities.  So the leverage there is roughly 11 to 1. Obviously, as the Chairman said, were going to have to go through the same 
analysis that we did for consumer asset-backeds; we have to do it for other asset classes to determine what is an appropriate haircut given the expected loss experience of commercial real estate, of private-label RMBS, and so on, under these scenarios.  So I think we cant say for sure exactly what the leverage ratio is going to be.  As the Chairman said, we have choices on haircuts, we have choices on rates, we have choices on how much capital the Treasury supplies to backstop the facilityall those parameters can be adjusted.  But I think, as a rule of thumb, we started down the TALF path for consumer asset-backed securities thinking that they were going to be roughly 10 percent. Thats where we ended up.  So its probably going to be 
   something on the same order of magnitude.  But the analysis is going to have to drive that process. I would hesitate to commit to a number before the staff has a chance to do that analysis.  MR. FISHER. One last question, Mr. Chairman.  You mentioned, after spelling this out a bit before, that we would provide some bridge-financing for the aggregator bank.  Whats the order of magnitude and whats the dynamic of that bridge-financing that we contemplate presently? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, it may or may not be needed.  The maximum scale of the bank is $500 billion at initial stages.  It is a bank, and I assume it will be structured as a bank and, therefore, be eligible for normal discount window collateral-based lending.  I think the notion is that in the very short run there may be some timing differences between the purchases being made by the asset managers and the acquisition of the financing.  So there might be short periods of mismatch where Fed financing would allow the thing to operate. I view this as being very short-term, well-collateralized, normal bank lending, and it should have no implications, I think, for our balance sheet or our monetary policy, because it will be a matter of weeks or a month or two at the most, I would imagine, and may not be necessary at all; but its just a backstop as the thing gets running.  We have a good bit of confidence that we can find long-term financing mechanisms other than the Fed, including even the possibility, for example, that the assets that are purchased might be paid for with guaranteed liabilities of the aggregator bank. So I dont view this as really a problem that any of us should be particularly concerned about, and it will not invoke any special authority.  It will not invoke 13(3) or anything like that. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
  MR. HOENIG. Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you for the briefing.  I have a couple of questions. When we do this scrubbing of these banks, is the source of the capital the remaining part of TARP, or is there additional funding anticipated for this? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So this is a very, very close hold.  Our very rough estimates suggest that its conceivable, particularly given the assumption that the TARP I preferred stock could be converted to common, that we could actually manage this whole thing, including the expansion of the TALF, et cetera, and including $50 billion plus for foreclosures within the existing authority, within the remaining $350 billion (I should also mention I was at the White House last night discussing foreclosures, and that will be part of the program, perhaps later this week). That being said, its not certain, and thats why, for better or worse, the Treasurys strategy is to unveil a program and approach, to be a little coy about cost, to see what they get in terms of political and industry reactions, with the idea that if the program itself gains some 
support, it will be easier at that point to say, Well, heres what we need to fund it.  But I dont know whether thats going to succeed. Theyre going to ask Tim that question, but Im sure hell try to dodge it. But the hope is, and I think there is some chance, that were not talking about a massive increase in the TARP. Part of this, of course, is a bit of an end run around the TARPs original scoringwhich is irrational scoring and had TARP being charged for the total value of any amount of assets purchased or insuredby using the TALF and by using the aggregator bank with public capital but private FDIC-insured financing and private capital.  The capacity of those instruments to buy assets is a multiple of what the TARP contribution is, which makes good sense both politically 
and economically, I think. 
  Because of those types of things, it does seem that somewhere around what we have might be adequate; but, on the other hand, it needs to be clear to the banks that were not going to go out there and say, Well, you need so much capital, butsorry, we ran out.  Also, theres always the risk of other emergencies.  So we have to have some confidence that there will be enough capital to meet whatever the size that the scrub suggests. MR. HOENIG. If you encounter a bankone of the largest 22 and beyondthat is  insolvent, then would we basically use the FDICs resolution process to go in and recapitalize and create a bad bank for that institution at that time and have to be 100 percent owner of that and then move forward from there? Is that the plan? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The plan is not as explicit as I would like.  Maybe theres some constructive ambiguity going on.  Yes, if a bank is insolvent, then presumably what will happen is that well use a systemic risk exception.  The FDIC will seize the bank.  It will zero out the shareholders. It will make whole all of the major debt holdersfollowing, again, the systemic risk exception which allows for non-least-cost resolutionand it will liquidate the 
bank. So thats certainly one possibility. Its a more complex situation, though, particularly at 
the two biggest problem banks, because, even though their asset losses might exceed their capital, they do have franchise values; and its a bit of a judgment call as to whether the economic interest is in liquidating them or in trying to preserve them, or at least parts of them.  So thats a decision that, presumably, this investment board is going to have to make.  But, yes, the FDIC will definitely be prepared to do either open bank or closed bank assistance if the bank is ruled insolvent. MR. HOENIG. I ask that question because, if we can clarify that, then you would have, I think, a greater certainty in the sense of: Yes, we are going to take it over, and yes, we are going 
   to run it and then reprivatize it.  And that takes uncertainty out of it if the banks are, in fact, insolvent.  And if they are not insolvent, then youre going to take ownership up to whatever it requires to bring their capital ratios up, and youre going to take a managing role and reprivatize them, so that they are systematically administered all the way through.   You also mentioned in your comments that all banks can seek this capital, and I dont know what that means exactly going forward.  In other words, if, after the 22, you go into these other banks, those with less than $100 billion and they werent insolvent, but they were undercapitalizedwe have a ton of commercial real estate ahead of uswould the FDIC, I guess, be in a position to add capital and then these banks would become part of this Government 
Investment Board oversight as well? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For banks beyond the 22, my understanding would be that just because of lack of resourcestheyre not going to go through the same scrub with the same forward-looking buffer requirement.  They will instead go through the usual supervisory process. Presumably they have less or no systemic consequences.  So they will be where they 
are now, basically.  They may be helped or not by the asset purchases going on, but they will have access, obviously, to the aggregator bank, and theyll have access to the capital should they choose to take it. But they will be in a different place.  Bill. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Just one thing that I think is different for the smaller banks relative to the larger banks is that a much greater proportion of their capital structure is in tangible common equity, and, if you remember, the stress test is going to be applied probably against this tangible common equity standard. For most small banks, theyre probably going to have quite a bit of room on that metric.  And as the Chairman said, its just not practical in a two-
   month window to scrub 8,000 banks. So youre really relying on the fact that most of these small banks are better capitalized on the metric that you really care about.  MR. HOENIG. Not to disagree with you, Bill, but most of these 8,000 banks are being prioritized now and are being scrubbed across the country.  So I think this issue is coming forward, and it will be focused on commercial real estate.  I can assure you of that.  I have another question. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Deborah Bailey wants to add to the answer. 
MS. BAILEY. One thing that I just wanted to make sure we understand is that the test on insolvency is different from having a buffer.  For the large institutions, you would only get to the 
point of insolvency if, in fact, you looked at their expected losses for the first year and you got a reserve need that was so big that it actually made the institution insolvent.  What was outlined here is the amount of capital a bank would need as a buffer to get beyond that one-year time frame, whether it is two years or three years. You would not use that calculation to make a determination of insolvency.  So I just want to make sure that you understand, in looking at even the largest two that were talking about, the insolvency decision is made the same way as always.  If you have no capital or youve gone below 2 percent (for prompt corrective action), then we would do, obviously, what we would do in the normal course for large banks, or any bank.  But thats not what we are talking about here in terms of capital buffer. MR. HOENIG. Well, Deborah, Im not sure I understand your answer, because if you have an institution and you do the exam and it has X number of assets in difficulty, which brings its capital down to, say, 3 percent, they would then choose to apply for capital under this program, and then what would you do?  Would you acknowledge their request and provide them 
that capital, or would you say no becausewhatever the reason? 
    MS. BAILEY. We would acknowledge that request and give them the capital.  I was responding to your question on insolvency for the large banks, and I just wanted to make sure you understood that. MR. HOENIG. I appreciate that.  I have two more questions.  In terms of the TALF just to clarify and maybe take some of my confusion awayin this mornings paper there was discussion about the TALF encompassing our willingness, as these new asset-backed securities are developed, to actually work through hedge funds, and you had mentioned possibly confining this to commercial banks or broadening it.  Can you clarify that for me, so that I understand whom we would be working through as the counterparty on this, as we engage in the TALF? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The way this works is that the asset-backed securities are originated typically by banks; incidentally, it would be those banks that are creating the ABS that are subject to the TARP restrictions on compensation and so on.  But we are not buying the ABS.  What we are doing is lending to investors who, in turn, want to buy the ABS.  Those investors could be hedge funds, or they could be other kinds of investors; but the counterparty is not really that important, because this is a nonrecourse loan.  So the loan, in any event, is based on the collateral and the haircut. From a political point of view, weve developed some talking points on this.  Governor Tarullo raised this question, as well. We do restrict the counterparties to U.S. institutions, so foreign institutions are not eligible.  I should say that going forward, although initially we are going to be taking them first come, first serve, if there is strong demand, then we are prepared either to adjust the terms to reduce the attractiveness or to go explicitly to some kind of auction mechanism.  So one way or another, there will not be excess returns being earned by anybody, because if there are excess returns, they will be competed away through the auction process or 
   whatever mechanism we use to allocate these funds.  But our direct counterparties will be nonbanksthe investors who buy the ABSbut its a nonrecourse loan, so the fact that we dont supervise them is really not very relevant. MR. HOENIG. One last question about the Government Investment Board, which has the oversight role. If we had enough ownership, would they select an individual to sit on the boards of directors of these institutions, or would that be determined separately from the Government Investment Board in terms of the governments ownership and representation? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My understanding is the Government Investment Board is an attemptwhether it will be successful or not is debatableto insulate a bit the running of the 
business from the political process, to have some kind of business-oriented oversight.  In fact, for banks that are in trouble and have substantial government ownership, there will really be two complementary enforcement mechanisms.  One is the supervisory mechanism, and the other will 
be this oversight board, which will be essentially voting the governments stock.  I assume that those two mechanisms would collaborate.  For troubled banks, the supervisors might demand a change in the board of directors and a change in management, and they probably would get agreement from the Government Investment Board.  The oversight board can do what it wants, basically. It might just demand a change in the management and change in the board of directors, or it might decide that it wants to put its own hand-picked people on the board of directors. But, again, the hope is that this will be a step removed from direct government decisions about loans, for example, and will simply be an attempt to get the business in as good a shape as possible either to sell it off or, at some point, to dismember it. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. 
   MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, Id like to say that relative to the fears for our balance sheet that I expressed ten days ago, Ive heard a lot of things that have made me  feel much better about this.  So I think youve done a great job. On the TALF, you mentioned that our goal could expand to $1 trillion.  Is that going to be our decision, or is that going to be part of the Treasury announcement? And I guess that interacts with the capital cushion, the haircuts, and how much were going to lever.  So any light you could shed on that would be helpful. In looking at the term sheets on the TALF yesterday, somebody pointed out to me that the haircuts for some loans seemed to be lower than what is charged at the discount window.  But maybe those arent apples-to-apples comparisons?  It seems that its more generouslower for the TALFas I understand it. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. They are borrowing at a higher rate, thoughLIBOR plus 100 basis points. MR. NELSON. And theyre triple-A ABS. MR. EVANS. Okay. So at the discount window theyre not rated.  So theres more uncertainty. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Also, these are only new assets and not legacy assets.  So that reduces the uncertainty as well. MR. NELSON. It could be that they were looking at haircuts for the asset type that was backing them. MR. EVANS. Its just that, as you look at the table, it does get your attention.  So maybe an additional FAQ on that would be helpful. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If there are questions related to the announcement yesterday, Bill Nelson and many others here can address those.  Dont hesitate to put those in.  On the $1 trillion, I think the announcement will be something like up to $1 trillion, and depending on what we learn, et cetera.  So I think the headline number will be out there, but certainly we have to be comfortable with the structure of the program, its utility, the applicability of 13(3)that is, are conditions still warranting that kind of activitythe credit protection, et 
cetera. So theres no commitment here.  Theres  no way that they could force us or otherwise claim that we had committed to $1 trillion.  But I do think, given the fact that our balance sheet has actually shrunk recently, that this commitment plus the GSE purchases puts us in a range which is very substantially supportive but is manageable from a monetary policy point of view.  I 
should never, ever, ever make promises or say never, because Ive been wrong every time as the economy has deteriorated, but Im hopeful that this would be the last key initiativebut, who knows? MR. EVANS. So on the TALF expansion, I can guess that my colleagues and everyone here have gotten a lot of phone calls and correspondence from people who were outside of the asset classes that have access to it, and as you expand it, I assume that this is only going to grow.  So I wonder, will there be discussions, or could we at least have some guidance as to what the selection process is? And then finally, on the bank preferred stock from TARP IIm just not familiar enough with thiswhat is the bank reaction to this going to be when we now come at them and say that, oh, this is going to be convertible into common stock? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think theyll like that. 
MR. EVANS. Will they be happy about that?  I have talked to a lot of bankers who say, Look, I didnt really need this, but it seemed like a good signal at the time. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. First of all, its at their option. They dont have to do it. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It will be converted if they absolutely need it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. They only do it if they need it.  Of course, that will depend both on their need for capital and on the price, and I dont know what the strike price is.  I dont know how thats set upthats another piece of important information.  The downside, of course, is, if youre converting huge amounts of capital into common, you have to deal with the control issue. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. They wont like that event of the conversion, but that event would be precipitated by the fact that they had very bad performance and they needed the common equity. So its sort of a good newsbad news kind of paradigm. On your TALF asset question, I think that were going to try to have the Treasury not be definitive about what assets are included or not included in the expanded TALF.  To give a for example:  Were pretty comfortable, I think, with our analysis that CMBS and private-label RMBS should be included. But whether it goes beyond that, I think, is really in the to be determined category, and I think we are going to try to make sure that the Treasury 
announcement doesnt commit us to things beyond CMBS and private-label RMBS.  Thats certainly our intention. MR. NELSON. Just to say definitively, if I could, the haircuts on triple-A ABS charged at the discount window are all smaller than the ones charged by the TALF. MR. EVANS. I thought that autos were higher.  MR. NELSON. There is no distinction among the discount window haircuts.  So you might be thinking of auto loans as opposed to triple-A ABS that are backed by auto loans.  MR. EVANS. Yes, I was. Thats why I said it might not be apples to apples. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Okay, Charlie? MR. EVANS. Yes. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  President Stern. 
MR. STERN. My questions have been addressed. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Mr. Chairman, let me make sure I understand on the TALF.  Is this going to be contingent on the ability to sterilize the expansion of the TALF? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, mostly.  If the legislation giving the ability to sterilize is not passed, then were back to where we were last week, which is that we have to make judgments about how much expansion of what programs were comfortable with, based on our assessment of the duration of those commitments and on the presumed effectiveness of things like interest on reserves and so on.  But I think clearly theres a tit for tat, in that there is no commitment on our part to do $1 trillion.  I mean, we may nonetheless make the decision to do something.  I think we need to make judgments as a Committee about what were comfortable with in terms of ultimately unwinding and sterilizing those impacts. I would guess that, without the legislation, the $1 trillion would probably be quite uncomfortable for us, because, assuming that the new ABS is done on the same terms as the initial, its a three-year commitment with some tail potentially after that if they put assets to us.  Thats worrisome in terms of the size and duration of the balance sheet. So I wouldnt say that we wouldnt go beyond $200 billion, necessarily, but I think the chance that we would go even substantially towards $1 trillion would be quite unlikely. MS. DUKE.  Okay, and then a second question.  I worry that this announcement might have actually the opposite effect on the banks. Do we have any contingency plan if this doesnt 
 go well and there start being runs on uninsured liabilities at the banks? Do we have any contingency plan for what well do then? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think we have had various strategies in the past, including injection of capital and so on, and I guess under the current situation, theyd be prepared to inject common. It would be the first time theyve done that.  I will raise this with Tim Geithner, but theres been no discussion in our group.  Deborah has a comment. MS. BAILEY. I dont have a good response to your question, but there is a separate group working on what steps we might take if, for example, theres vulnerability, particularly around some of the larger banks, before this program can even get up and running, or if theres another Friday night phone call. There is an interagency group that is not only working through the steps and clearly thinking about the capital and the wraps that we have done before, but that is also considering what other actions might need to be taken. Theres also a separate subgroup of people who are thinking about the legal changes that need to be made in the regulatory structure to be able to deal with a failure of a large, systemically important financial holding company; now we would have to deal with it through something like bankruptcy, which is not acceptable. So were laying out all of those stepswhat weve done before, what other things we can do. The FDIC is involved in it. Were trying to quickly put down on a couple of sheets of paper all of those things. MS. DUKE.  I can foresee a circumstance where this is interpreted as a change in the regulatory requirements for capital, a judgment that the values in the banks equity are not there, a judgment that there is a plan to go in and close large numbers of banks, and I can see it being a particular vulnerability for those that are large but not as largefor instance, anything smaller than WaMu.  And I can see those banks having a very violent reaction or their counterparties 
   having a violent reaction, something that would force us into action in a large number of good-sized banks. I just think we ought to think about what we would do in that case. MS. BAILEY. We have run screens, too, just to see which banks might on day one have a capital bogey that would not necessarily meet that tangible common equity threshold, to see which ones the market might pick on right awaythat are vulnerableand there are probably about four of them.  So weve tried to go through and look at those particular firms. MS. DUKE.  We might think its four of them, but the markets might think its a lot more than four of them.  That would be one concern here.  The second concern I would have is that given the experience with the TARP capital and in many cases the buyers remorse of having taken that capital, I can see a scenario where the banks would immediately start to dump assets and sell business lines in order to fortress up their liquidity as well as create additional capital in ways that dont involve the government. And I think those outcomes would be very different than what we expect to happen or what we would like to have happen here. MS. BAILEY. Ill add one other thing to that point:  It hasnt been decided yet. As the Chairman said, a lot of the details are still being worked out.  But there is a concern around banks retooling their balance sheets, shutting down on lending, or shrinking their balance sheets to make some particular capital ratio bogey.  Were trying to figure out ways to get around that.  For example, last night there was a lot of discussion about having a dollar amount of capital to focus on as opposed to a capital ratioso were trying to see if we can work through some process where banks dont shrink their balance sheets just to get to a certain capital ratio.  People are working on all of that now, and were all concerned about the same thing. MS. DUKE. Yes. The experience of the messaging in the last round is not encouraging. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We agree with that concern very much, and were going to raise this again with Tim.  I guess there are always these short-run versus long-run concerns.  I think, on the other hand, we do not want to commit to maintaining the existence of every current bank that is operating, and, as I said, one thing I like about this in principle, although the communication is a huge problem, is that it is very market-based and very tough love.  The hope is to come out the other side with a banking system which is plausibly well-capitalized and can inspire investor confidence.  But the transition could be very tricky, and we need to think very hard about contingency plans and about our communications. Vice Chairman, you have a two-hander? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, and I think that Governor Duke raises some very important points, which is why I was here until late in the night last night, to try to improve the messaging. I think theres another issue, too, which is that there are firms that can be resolved pretty easily within the existing bank resolution framework, and theres one particular firm that cant; we are working on how to handle the one particular firm that cant, but its very, very difficult, given the existing tools. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher had a two-handed intervention.   MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to underscore the questions that Governor Duke has asked, because of the cumulative process here under the previous administration.  Im not attacking that administration, but the way things were announced and delivered by the Secretary of the Treasury and the whole process made for really a ready, fire, aim approach.  And Im very uncomfortable.  I understand the pressure that everybodys under and that Secretary Geithner is under, but the vagueness here, which you mentioned at the beginning, will 
 in my opinion just feed upon what was almost a spastic methodology (thats a gross word, but, in effect, thats what it was), because weve gone through this process before.  So, in a sense, the markets are conditioned to worry whenever something is announced, and I do think we all should beyou should be, the Board should be, and the FOMC should beprepared for a harsh 
negative reaction. The lack of specificity here is what theyve seen before, and I realize that thats, in some peoples minds, politically wiseto see what the reaction isbut we plant the 
seeds for a very harsh reaction by being vague.  And I just wanted to add my concern to Governor Dukes. At least we should be prepared for a very harsh reaction.  My response to this is, its just one more uncertain step being taken.  I know how hard were working on this, and I know how much thought has gone into that. So were learning at every step.  But be prepared for a negative reaction that could be quite harsh, and at least we ought to have that in our contingency planning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Warsh, you had a two-hander, but also a regular question? MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me just echo the comment you made at the outset, which I think Governor Duke and others have made.  It will sound in the spirit of piling on, because this is obviously an incredibly tough situation and were all doing our very best. I think in terms of market expectations that you and, I think, Bill referencedthese expectations have been raised about what is going to be announced on Monday.  My sense is that this program is both more and less than theyre expecting:  More in that it is broader and more comprehensive; less in that its less clear what this is going to mean in effect and with respect to timing.  So Id say that while the questions are being asked about how this works in practice, we are likely to have markets test that weakness, test that ambiguity, and I suspect they will do that 
  in this upcoming week, particularly with respect to some of our most systemically important  institutions. So I think for them this will be exceptionally problematic.  I hope that this is better received than my instincts and the instincts of some others on this call suggest, but I do think that we need to be as prepared as we can be to respond to these questions. With respect to how the Congress might react, I think thats an additional difficulty.  In some ways, I think this proposal is encouraging the Congress to engage in these discussions, engage on lending, engage on capital, which, again, I think will add uncertainty to markets over the course of the next several trading days. A couple of other concerns along those lines: While these questions are being raised, it will be more difficult, not less, for capital markets to get traction separate and apart from financial institution weakness, so I think that some of the improvements that weve seen from some of the facilities that have been announced and implemented in New York by Bill and his colleagues might be under increased difficulty during this period.  And then finally, just as a note of caution, I think even apart from those institutions that are going to have the biggest questions with respect to control and creeping nationalization and the intent of the U.S. government, I think there will be implications for the healthier ones who are their competitors, implications for their business model and their deposit base, which were going to be put in the position of having to address. So I wish I had easy answers to it, but my sense would be that, in the course of the discussions with Treasury between now and Monday morning, there are really two ways to go.  One is to go narrower at the first and be more specific about particular programs and set expectations about when they will announce the rest.  The other is to try to put some time parameters around when theyre going to answer questions subsequentlyso that we dont just 
 have a series of leaks and bleeding information that finds its way into the newspapers.  I think the Fed has been remarkably quiet and confidential during this.  My sense is Treasury has, as well. But, if the last week is any indication, the sort of false starts and messages that come from  this process are going to create difficulties.  So let me stop there, but just raise my concerns there as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We hear that.  President Pianalto had a two-hander.   MS. PIANALTO. I have a couple of concerns similar to those Governor Duke raised.  I have been hearing directly from some of the banks in my District.  Two of them I believe are 
among the four that Deborah said we are watching closely.  They have been hit hard in the past 
week in terms of stock prices because of concerns that they are not going to be able to take advantage of some of the programs that youve laid out.  Now, one of the things that they raised is that markets are speculating that their financial conditions are so bad that they wouldnt be able to participate in these programs.  What I like about what you laid out in the scrubbing of these institutions is that they are going to be treated equallybecause some of them are saying 
that some regulators are being a little less stringent, so there is not equal regulation or supervision of these institutions.  I think emphasizing in the communication that they are going to be scrubbed and treated consistently might be helpful, because, especially for a couple of institutions, the markets are judging that their financial condition is different than might otherwise be perceived. The other issue that they raised and you didnt mention as part of this package is the short-selling provision.  Again, this is important to them because some of these institutions stocks are getting hit extremely hard, because of some assumptions that are being made.  So 
   perhaps the ban on short-selling during this period of uncertainty is an option and something we should consider again. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The SEC has not been involved in this discussion.  I havent heard any plans to do that, but its an idea. Governor Duke had a two-handed intervention. MS. DUKE.  One other follow-up on the scrubbing process:  I think theres a risk that this gets interpreted as an admission of regulatory failure, as if we have not already supervised them adequately and have let them report assets at the wrong values.  That further erodes the credibility of both the supervisors as well as the financials of banks that are doing fine.  And I would worry that we would get caught up in a conversation about whether or not the supervisory process had done its job, rather than being able to convey the message that were looking at a more stressed scenario than would be required by regular accounting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So the language in the document as it currently stands: In conjunction with the review of the capital planning process, supervisors are undertaking a coordinated review of banks reserving and valuation to ensure consistency and appropriateness across banks.  Supervisors will also work with institutions to increase the transparency by enhancing each firms public disclosure of exposures, non-performing assets, and reserves, as well as firms internal assessments of expected credit losses. So I think the emphasis is a bit more on consistency, but the point you raise is one that has been mentioned and was noted on the communication issue. MS. DUKE. President Pianalto is assuming that this means that the others will do the job as well as we did.  You may have all of the supervisory agencies thinking that this means that everybody else will do things as well as they did and the general public thinking that nobody had done the job properly before this. 
      CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other two-handers? [No response.] Okay. So back to the normal cycle here.  President Plosser.  MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think this last round of discussion about communication is really critical, and I share some of the concerns that have been raised.  The other point Governor Duke raised that I think is important is the relationship between the proposals for sterilization and the increase in the size of the TALF.  And I like the proposal you made, Mr. Chairman.  I think its a great step forward.  But Im anticipating that well have to hang tough on thatthat there might be a lot of pushback from the Congress saying, You dont need to do this. Just do the TALF and increase it to $1 trillion anyway.  We dont need to provide you with the sterilization capabilities.  And I think we have to be pretty tough in trying to ensure that we have that flexibility.  I think its an important step. The other thing is the Government Investment Board you talked about.  Will they have oversight over all banks who accept capital from the TARP, either old or new?  Or will it be partitioned by some sort of sizejust the top 22? And, therefore, are they the ones that will be imposing these conditions you spoke ofthe commitments to lend, the executive compensation issues that would have some stronger conditions, and the dividend restrictions? Is that going to be managed through this oversight board, or is that something separate?  And whom will that apply to?  Again, just the ones that have accepted capital, or everyone? I dont know if theres any clarification on this. Back to the communicationabout the $1 trillion headline number.  I think its going to be viewed by many people as a target.  And were going to have to work hard not to have it interpreted that way. 
   My last question is about the aggregator bank.  Having a good bankbad bank model is obviously not something new.  There are a number of banks in history who have created good bankbad banks internally where they actually split a bank into two and gave shareholders and debt holders shares in both banks. Im wondering about a way of minimizing public commitment of capital for the bad bank, and Id just like to hear a little more discussion about how the public-private relationship in this bad bank might look.  Anything more expansive you can offer on that Id appreciate. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, just to reiterate, the $1 trillion is contingent on liquidity support, in the sense that we will have to take into account the availability of the sterilization facility in thinking about what we can do. And we all understand and take very seriously our responsibility to be able to unwind the programs in a timely way. The language on the independentit says hereGovernment Investment Board is a little vague. It says, The Board will oversee the management of our investments in financial institutions, which I guess means from an asset management point of view.  The Board will establish guidelines for and monitor our investment interests in financial institutions on questions 
of voting rights, dividend policy, compensation issues, and governance.  But it will also ensure compliance with conditions associated with USG investment, and will ensure transparency. It sounds to me as if its going to serve, to some extent, as a board that votes the governments interest.  And I assume that common will have different interest than preferred.  
But I am sure there will be general terms for accepting the money that are in the legislation or in the policy stated by the Treasury regarding executive compensation and so on.  Those will be universally applied.  The board will just make sure that theyre applied.  But the board will have 
the authority to go further, depending, for example, on the state of the bank. 
 On the aggregator bank, we looked at a huge number of different models.  I think if we had done the entirely public-controlled one, which, I should say, our staff generally tended to prefer to the publicprivate partnership, the argument would have been to create silos in the aggregator bank, one for each bank that participates, and then to pay for the assets acquired, in part with shares in those silo bankssort of a first-loss position.  That was the leading public alternative. The problem was that its not just an economic issue, but the Treasury feels very politically vulnerable to the charge that we are negotiating high prices and giving a back-door subsidy to the banks. Although our staff felt that we could do reverse auctions for broad classes of assets, the Treasury remained concerned, for example, about individual loans and other very idiosyncratic types of assets.  I think there is still some willingness to consider perhaps a combination of public and private acquisition, but they felt that having the private acquisition would look better in terms of ensuring that good prices were being obtained. Once you have private acquisition, however, then you have to give the private investment managers scope to buy whatever they want from any bank.  In fact, the initial idea was not even having to buy from banks, in which case its no longer a question of a bank saying, Well, heres the share of stuff we want to put into our bad bank. It really depends on what they can sell to the private investment manager.  So the good bankbad bank structure in each bank fits less comfortably, less easily, with this privatepublic arrangement. In terms of the details, there are not very many.  Again, Ive got this draft, and everything is time dated, because its a moving target.  It says, The Treasury will invest capital alongside 
private investors for the purchase of up to $500 billion in legacy assets from regulated financial institutions. Purchases through the investment portfolio will be guided by appropriate risk and 
   return objectives.  And there will be definitions of which classes are eligible; it refers to a competitive bidding process or private sector process.  Financing will be provided by the government with the degree of leverage guided by requirements consistent with a triple-A rating from an NRSRO.  So I think that means also that theyre taking some steps to make sure theres not a subsidy in the pricing mechanism or in the terms on which you finance the aggregator bank either. But well see.  Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think the key question about this aggregator bank is:   Given these private sector investors who are going to have to be compensated for the risks that theyre taking, will the bank pay prices high enough to incentivize banks to actually sell assets to 
the aggregator bank?  I think at this stage we dont really know the answer to that.  I dont think at this point we can really say how well or how badly it will work in practice. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The theory is that the reason theres such a huge bidasked spread between what the banks are willing to accept and what the investors are willing to pay is that theres this huge liquidity premium, basically because investors dont have long-term 
financing. So we are going to give them long-term financing.  That ought to make them willing to see through the liquidity premium.  That certainly will bring them closer together.  If theyre 
still not willing to sell, then it suggests that theres some informational differenceor somethingthat goes beyond the liquidity premium.  So at least it does address that important part of the bidasked spread. Two-hander from President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the answers.  But in some sense, wont the scrubbing exercise, at least for many of these banks, help drive them to make perhaps different decisions about those assets that theyre willing to sell and what theyre willing to sell them for? 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think thats right. For example, consider an asset that is carried on the banking book at 90 and for which the bank has reserved only for the next year.  If the government says, Were going to take seriously that your expected losses after the first year are 20, and were going to make you put in capital to match that 20, then maybe it makes more sense to sell at 75, right?  So, there should be some impact from that.  But it all depends on the execution as well as the concept.  Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Some of my questions were the ones that Governor Duke was raising. The capital piece of this seems to be very critical.  In some sense we backed away from the huge aggregator bank or the ring fencing in favor of just putting more capital in there, and I guess were sort of forcing the banks to come to us for capital with the scrubbing process. All of that makes sense to mewith a few questions.  It does strike me that this is a new requirement.  Now, I know, as Deborah has taught me, that we have Tier 1 capital requirements, and theyre supposed to be dominated by common, and weve kind of slipped from that.  But it does sound like we are putting in place a new capital requirement, and there are all the pro-cyclical problems with that.  Especially if we go to a dollar level of capital, we havent had those kinds of requirements before.  We havent ever told a bank that it cant sell pieces of the bank to meet our requirements. I think there will be huge resistance to this by the banking sector.  Now, maybe part of this will depend on the terms on which the new capital comes in.  One prominent banker 
yesterday said he wouldnt take any new capital.  He may not have any choice.  But I think theres going to be a lot of resistance to the capital.  I feel bad, because I dont have a solution to any of these problems.  Im just pointing out my concerns. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were going into the period of the financial crisis where the government is going to begin to dictate capital requirements, so a lot of people are going to be facing that. In principle, our existing requirements require holding capital against expected losses beyond the reservable period. So this is not a departure in principle.  Its just something that hasnt been effectively executed in the context of a rapidly declining economy. MS. BAILEY. And I think getting to the 3 percent bogey gets to the predominant figure.  That doesnt change the well-capitalized requirement of 6 percent.  So we were trying really hard not to come up with a new capital standard in that sense.  MR. KOHN. But we are using the stress scenario. MS. BAILEY. Right, but only for the buffer. 
MR. KOHN. But then were making that buffer a requirementsort of.  I think its the right thing to create a safer banking system, one thats robust to the stress scenario.  But its going to be very difficult. MS. BAILEY. I think there will be some differences.  Were trying not to do just a fixed percent. Thats why were looking at it institution by institution and working with the examiners who have some insights on the quality of different portfolios in order to get to a buffer.  I agree 
with the Chairman.  The buffer was always supposed to be there.  Its the environment were now requiring it in thats very different. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think the expectation, too, is that this number is not going to be stated. In order to minimize the idea that there is this new requirement, theres not going to be a number out there that they actually have to go to.  What we have here is a fundamental tension between individual institutions who want to hold only enough capital for the 
good states of the world, and us, who want them to hold enough capital for the bad states of the 
  world, to make the bad states less likely.  And that fundamental tension has existed throughout the last year and a half.  The buffer is designed to cut through that dilemma a little bit by forcing them to hold enough capital that they can withstand a bad state of the world, which will then make the bad state of the world less likely.  I think thats the intent.  But theyre not going to like it. I think thats fair.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So the current document says that the capital is going to be sized on the basis of the capital planning process, undertaken in conjunction with the firms supervisor. The capital buffer established under this program does not represent a new capital standard, and it is not expected to be maintained on an ongoing basis.  Instead, the buffer is available to help absorb larger-than-expected future losses and to support lending to creditworthy borrowers. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  The capital that we normally want them to hold is private capital.  Now we not only want them to hold that, but we want them to hold ours, because ours is the only capital that they can get.  MR. WILCOX.  This will be structured with pretty strong incentives to try to get them to buy us out of the position, precisely on that consideration. MR. KOHN. In terms of the market reaction, my expectationand I defer to Bill would be that reaction in the equity market will be extremely negative, but not necessarily in the liquidity market.  Weve seen such things before.  We used to have a dynamic between the CDS spreads and the equity market and liquidity, and weve broken that with the TLGP, the Fed facilities, and things like that.  So I dont see any reason for liquidity to slip, except perhaps for those marginal institutions that Betsy referred tothe ones where no one knows whether theyre in the too big to fail category or notand the others that Kevin was talking about, the ones 
    right at the top that seem to be slipping.  In those cases, I wouldnt expect a run as much as the slow bleed, because who knows whats going to happen, and business will go away.  But I think its important that the TLGP has been extended, and it would be good to put whatever emphasis we can put on that to protect liquidity.  I think the aggregator bank is important, because that is an offset. And even if it doesnt pay above market in some sense, I think it will helpjust like our buying MBS. Im impressed with the effect our purchase of MBS and support of commercial paper has had; just putting a bid in those markets has helped.  So the bigger the aggregator bank can be and the stronger the TLGP is, I think, the more they will be able to provide a little bit of protection against the downside risk in the capital.  Finally, on the TALFthis is not a question, but a viewI think its so important to get these securitization markets working.  Weve spent a lot of time talking about the capital constraints on the banks; thats not going to go away any time soon.  If we want credit flowing to households and businesses, a lot of it has to flow through the securitization market.  The TALF is there to encourage the demand for securitized assets.  We dont know whether it will work.  A lot of smart people think it will work, and our fingers are crossed.  But we also have the opportunity to rejigger it and try and make it work, if it doesnt work the first time.  I do think the sterilization part is important.  But I think its also very important to get that market going.  We ought to cooperate as best we can in getting that happening. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  I would just challenge the assumption that the equity prices dont matter, because when the vast majority of the public sees those stock prices going down, particularly to the very low levels that theyve reached recently, that triggers some concern about the institution. 
     They dont have anything else to look atthe only thing they can see is whats happening to the stock prices, and thats how they judge. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im taking some notes on what everyone is saying, and I want to say that many of the views Ive heard are consistent with what I and some of the staff believe.  We will communicate this to the Treasury Secretary.  But if anybody, including presidents, wants to communicate specific points or specific concerns to me, do it via Michelle, if youd like. I will aggregate them into an e-mail or into a memo and send it to him saying, This is the sense of the FOMC; here are some issues that were raised, and just make sure, at least, that he is aware of some of these concerns.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. That would be an aggregator memo? [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. But with separate 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Separate silos for each Bank? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. MR. LACKER. I have a couple of questions. First is about this last discussion.  Maybe theres something else going on here, but the sense you get is that the inability of banks to raise private equity has to do with two things: One is that the probability distribution around their losses is wide enough that theres a substantial chance that, absent government intervention,  some losses would be absorbed by debt holders, so new equity would, to some extent, subsidize current debt holders; the second is the prospect for future government capital injections that are dilutive. It strikes me that its going to be unlikely for banks to raise private equity until those two sources of concern for potential equity investors are removed. The aggregator bank and some of the other programs can reduce that uncertaintythat debt overhang problem.  Of course, if the banks had enough capital, there wouldnt be a debt 
  overhang problem.  But if there is one now, theyre not going to be able to raise private equity to get to a point where their equity cushion is big enough to reduce that debt overhang problem.  So Im not sure its going to be likely they are going to have any success in raising private capital under this plan. And on this question, Governor Kohn said somethingand if this was in your presentation, Mr. Chairman, I missed itabout them  not being able to sell assets to raise their capital ratio. Is that a provision of what is proposed? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Deborah talked about an alternative discussion about setting capital in terms of quantities instead of ratios, but thats not something that, as far as I know, is in the plan at this juncture.  I think there will be some deleveraging that will go on.  The hope would be that the aggregator bank, et cetera, would be a safety valve for that. MR. LACKER. Governor Kohn said something about a restriction on them not selling assets. I didnt quite understand that. MR. KOHN. Deborah had noted that that was a concernthat they would meet the requirement by selling assets; and one way of trying to mitigate that was to set the capital requirement in terms of an amount, so selling assets wouldnt necessarily help you meet the new requirement. MS. BAILEY. It is a big concern that banks could try to meet the new requirement in a variety of ways, including selling their assets.  On the other hand, there are good examples where you do want them to deleverage and sell the assets.  But the problem in terms of getting things moving again is, if they just shut down, dont lend at all, totally strip their balance sheet, it somewhat defeats the purpose.  So people are brainstorming about other ways to do this without leading to shrinkage of the balance sheet to meet some ratio number. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, President Lacker, I dont think thats in the current version of the plan. I guess you could call it a benefit that the concern that the aggregator bank wouldnt have any business gives an additional reason for banks to offload assets to the aggregator bank. MR. LACKER. I took the broad lesson of the RTC, Japan, and Sweden to be that selling assets has some benefits as well as some potential problems, so I wasnt quite sure what the attitude was about that. Im a little puzzled about the incentives in the aggregator bank.  You talked about the private profit motive and paying fundamental values for things.  Yet theyre going to have this huge government guarantee in their liabilities, and Im not quite sure how we ought to view the incentives of the private equity holders who would control that.  Its not clear to me that theyre going to be managing it from a socially optimal point of view. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The argument is analogous to the TALF in a way.  As I was saying before, the idea is that theres lots of money on the sidelines willing to buy these troubled assets. The rate of expected return is now very high, because of liquidity and risk premia.  But whats preventing the purchases is lack of long-term reliable financing.  The bank would make that financing available but not at concessional rates; alsoand this may not be fully market-basedit would provide a little bit of downside tail risk, because thered be some government capital involved. But, of course, on the other hand, youd have to share the returns with the government based on their capital contribution. The idea is that you give these investors some long-term financing, so they dont have to worry so much about the short-term holding risks and liquidity risks, and, therefore, they would be able to buy more and offer better prices than theyre able to now without that support.  So 
    thats the logic of it.  And because they share in the profits, they have no incentive whatsoever to overpay for whatever assets they acquire.  Theyll pay as little as they can, and so arguably we can tell the public that theyre getting the benefits of aggressive market-based pricing. MR. LACKER. That argument depends on the financing rate being a true rate, and the financing rate they could get now in the market being some distorted rate, I guess.  If thats not true, then were subsidizing their financing, and they ought to be willing to pay more. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats right, but also, theres going to be competition among the potential investors for this license, and that will bid away some of the rents, I think. MR. LACKER. Yes, but the value of those rents will be contingent on their ability to pursue whatever strategy they want when they control it.  So that doesnt mitigate the effect on what theyre willing to pay for things.  In fact, it requires them to overpay if warranted by the financing arrangement. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, this is as much about optics as it is about economics.  They want to be able to portray a market-based system that is not suffering from serious adverse 
selection and overpayment issues. MR. LACKER. I have two questions about the TALF.  One is that I think it would be a good thing if our best estimates are that the probability that the Federal Reserve bears a loss is virtually negligible. There have been analyses like that in the private sector that havent come true in the past.  Were all tied together in the Reserve Banks in terms of these losses, and our boards of directors are expressing an increasingly avid interest in the nature of the risks were exposed to on our balance sheets. And here were taking the Fed Systems balance sheet from 
$1.7 trillion or something up to $2.7 trillionthis is a fairly notable increase.  I think it would be useful for us to have access, at a fairly detailed level, to this analysis of the potential losses to the 
 Federal Reserve that might be involved in the TALFwhat kind of analytics determine the parameters, and how they were set, and why we have confidence that the probability of losses is fairly minimal.  Id be interested in knowing if you could assure us wed get access to that from  whoever is doing the analysis within the System. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. How about a presentation at the next FOMC?  Would that be acceptable? MR. LACKER. Do you mean just a verbal presentation? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, with documents and details.  We can send you analysis, if youd like. But you might prefer to have a discussion and a verbal presentation as well. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Its not the most straightforward thing to work your way through, and I think we can share a lot of material on that.  But if I could address the risk of the TALF for just a second, Id mention four points.  One, its a triple-A-rated security, so its already at the upper part of the capital structure.  Two, theres a haircut that the investor takes above and beyond that triple-A-rated security. Three, theres a spread in terms of the interest margin thats earned.  And then, four, theres the Treasury capital between us and loss. So a lot of things have to happen to get to the Fed actually losing money here.  And under most scenarios, the Treasury doesnt lose money.  The Treasury makes money on an expected value basis under reasonably stressful scenarios.  We can share that stuff with you.  But I think its important to recognize that these are new securitizations, so theyre newly underwritten, and a lot of things have to happen before they get to us. MR. LACKER. Yes. I understand the details of the program.  I understand all of the buffers there are between us and some losses. But in the past, people said the triple-A tranches of RMBS CDOs were virtually risk-free, and now theyre selling for below 50 cents on the 
 dollar. I know your folks are more expert in this than the rating agencies.  Its just that we want some comfort, and we want to be able to vouch to our boards of directors, who still have the standard fiduciary responsibilitieseven though the Treasury is obviously bearing the loss at the end of the daythat we understand the risks that are being run and that were comfortable telling them that we understand the risks are low.  So it will be good to get that analysis from you in New York. The second question I have about the TALF has to do with the role that hedge funds are going to play. Weve seen over the last couple of weeks a tremendous amount of political noise about executive compensation at the entities that have received TARP capital injections.  I wonder what our political vulnerability might be here to questions from the Congress or concerns raised in the public about the compensation practices or other practices of entities that are getting credit from the Federal Reserve on terms that arguably arent available in the market, so they are presumptively somewhat advantageous, and the loans are certainly governmental funds.  Is there some risk to us that wed be caught up in complaints about compensation practices and lavish expenditures at hedge funds? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats a good question.  I dont have a really satisfactory answer. On the one hand, we have had legal consultations, which persuaded us and the Treasury that, as far as meeting the letter of the law of the TARP is concerned, its sufficient to impose those compensation and other restrictions on the issuers of the ABS as opposed to the investors who are buying it. But, of course, youre righttheres always political risk there.  The other point is the communication issue, and weve made some efforts to set up some talking points to explain what this does and why its important. Michelle, can you send the Presidents a list of our 
  talking points about why this is a benefit for the general public?  But you raise a good pointits a risk. President Evans just wants to interject.   MR. EVANS. Will the investors in the aggregator bank be subject to any executive compensation regulations? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats a similar questionand I assume not.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I dont want to shut off the discussion on this point, if theres more.  But, if not, this is my third and final question.  Its a comment in addition to a question, and it has to do with where were going to come out in the enda year or two from nowwith regard to an accord on credit policy.  I understand that this is an intermediate step, and that you envision 
further discussions down the road towards a more complete or comprehensive understanding with the Treasury about credit policy. My concern here is that I think that there are a range of possible strategies, and I worry about whether the steps were taking now compromise where we might ultimately want to go.  I understand the provision of credit by the Federal Reserve in exceptionally exigent circumstances, where theres enormous time pressurewe get a call on a 
Friday night, and convening the Congress on a Saturday afternoon doesnt really seem feasible.  Thats fine with methat ought to be a Federal Reserve function. But for programs that take three months to implement, arguably it would be feasible perhaps not politically feasible, Ill admit that, and thats a separate questionbut as a matter of mechanics and parliamentary process, it would have been feasible to ask the Congress to approve the authority of the Treasury to implement the TALF program.  And it occurs to me that drawing a bright line at what is, in terms of timing, feasible for the Congress to authorize the Treasury to implement seems like a logical approach that has a lot of attractive properties for us. 
  Im concerned that were going down a path thats taking us in a different direction, and we might compromise something that might be more workable and more beneficial, and were doing it without a real discussion of where we want to head more broadly with regard to an accord on Treasury policy. As you describe it, part of the understanding with the Treasury now is that they would accompany us to the Congress in an appeal for a mechanism of one of two varieties for us to be able to sterilize our lending:  One would be the idea of us issuing non-monetary liabilities; the other would be for the Treasury to issue debt and deposit with us under the current program. The concern I have about the latter is what the nature of our understanding would be with the Treasury about who controls those issues. We ask, and they agree to say yes, usually, under reasonable circumstances.  Theres always the possibility that they will retain some implicit leverage over us that would constrain our independence going forward.  On the other hand, having the ability to control our own issues of non-monetary liabilities seems really attractive. But, again, I worry about bargaining power; in an event, knowing that we have that capability, the Treasury and the FDIC would, I think, retain the ability to stare us down and essentially say, Well, you have the ability to issue non-monetary liabilities that dont count against the federal debt limit, so you do it.  I think thats exactly the dynamic that emerged in the case of Citi and Bank of America, where there was nothing mechanically or legally that 
would have restricted the Treasury and the FDIC from taking all of the risk, and for us to bear 
none of the tail risk. But knowing that we had this tricky little mechanism for dressing up a guarantee as a loan, they prevailed upon us to participate and participate fairly substantially.  So I worry that setting up an ability for us to issue non-monetary liabilities that are the functional equivalent of Treasury bills and are outside of the appropriations process and dont count against 
 the debt limit would give both the Congress and the administration an avenue, a target, a mechanism that would make it irresistible for them to come to us to finance things that they didnt want to go to the Congress to finance. In my mind, the discussion about the accord needs to be about where its appropriate for government lending to be done.  You all know Ive raised objections about our lending programs, but this is apart from the advisability of any one program.  Its about the Congress and the appropriate constraints on circumventing the appropriations process, and its about our independence. I worry that were going down a path where, as I said, were going to be vulnerable to complaints about our inability or our unwillingness to constrain executive compensation or the lavish expenditures that entities that are going to be benefiting from our programs might make.  Were going down a path where people like Elizabeth Warren are going to be writing reports or could be writing reportsabout what we do.  I think thats a very uncomfortable situation to be in, and Id like us to think clearly about whether thats what were headed towards or whether this compromise is headed towards something that leaves us with a much broader and firmer measure of independence.  So I just wonder what thoughts youve given to that kind of question, Mr. Chairman, and the extent to which you view representations weve made in these discussions as compromising alternative strategies about a credit accord. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me respond very quickly.  Of course, Ive thought about this a great deal and tried to trade off various concerns.  I think were going to make progress towards an accord. I think were on a path in that direction.  In particular, we now have two asks in front of the Congress.  Onewhich we will press very hard for as part of regulatory reformwill be for a strong resolution regime for non-depository institutions.  If done properly, 
    that will eliminate the most vexatious and difficult and painful part of the 13(3) authority, which we used in the Sunday night massacres.  So thats very important. The second is this sterilization ask. I think that will also give us a great deal more independence in the sense that well be able to separate whatever decisions we make on our balance sheet from our monetary policy decisions.  And just so you know, certainly part of the deal with the Treasury is that, if they get a supplementary financing authority, its the Fed that will have the right to call for the use of those billsit will not be at the Treasurys discretion. As to your perspective on the Congress and the amount of time availableputting aside politically feasible, I dont think its technically feasible for the Congress.  Look at their inability to function on even relatively straightforward economic measures.  These things were doing, such as the TALF, theyre very complex, theyve been based on elaborate analysis of market and financial conditions, they have a lot of subtleties as far as legal issues, et cetera.  Theres just no way that the Congress can do that. They cant do that.  They created the Fed. They gave us 13(3) authority. We are making a judgment.  And I just want to say, in all of these discussions, we have to remember every minute that there were 600,000 jobs lost in January.  This is an enormously serious economic situation, and it requires unusual responses. We believe that the Congress doesnt have the capacity to come up with something like the TALF, that it is going to be constructive, and that its very important in the context of the current economic crisis.  And the Congress has every ability to shut it downthey have every ability. Were going to go to the Congress.  Im going to testify on 13(3) authorities on Tuesday.  The Treasury plan is going to make the sterilization part of the explicit legislative ask. All they have to do is not accept that.  That will limit us very substantially.  So I think that we are comfortably within our rights, within the law, and within reason to take these actions, 
    understanding that we are not in normal timeswe are in what you could very well call war time, and war time sometimes creates unusual necessities.  As I said, I think we are on the right path towards an accord, one that will take us out of the business of Sunday rescues, one that will give us flexibility on monetary policy separate from lending. I think ultimately we will have some more clarity, at least with the Treasury, regarding what conditions and terms under which we should get involved in any such lending program.  I think reasonable people can disagree about whether, for example, our swaps activities and some of the other things weve done are within the purview of the central bank in a financial crisis.  I would argue that they are. But thats something to be negotiated, and the current Treasury is, I think, very open to those negotiations. I think the political risk is overstated. Its possible that we may come up against this concern that you raised about restrictions on compensation of the hedge funds.  In that case, they will probably shut down the program, and thats yet another way in which the Congress can shut it down if they want to. But, even though were in the middle of the deepest part of the crisis, I get very few letters from the Congress saying we need to protect this or that sector, and the ones that I get are very perfunctory; and we reply saying, Well, we are doing X, and they never come back.  I just dont feel the pressure.  I think the pressure would come if the Fed stood by and let the economy fall into the abyss, which is a very real possibility.  So I think were trying to balance these concerns in a reasonable way.  My expectation is that were moving in the right direction in terms of getting an accord, and I believe that, given what I feel is actually a relative lack of pressure to make unusual lending in the current circumstances, when things return to normal, we should be able to draw lines and, indeed, as part of the process of financial reregulation and so on, should be able to clarify these things much better.  So Im less concerned 
  than you are, and I understand that there are judgments that have to be made about this.  But, remember, as I said600,000 jobs.  If we can do something about that in ways that have limited and manageable risk to us, I think we need to take that into account.  President Fisher, did you have a comment? MR. FISHER. Youve covered some of this in your response, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously, we need to be aware that a CDS market will build around Federal Reserve bills.  There are perception issues here, and Im sure that youve taken that into account, and the New York Desk has taken that into account, in at least developing our thoughts on Federal Reserve bills and this non-monetary paper that were going to issue.  That market will be discounting us in some way, shape, or form, and well just have to monitor that as we go through time. I wanted to shift the subject only slightly, because one of the concerns I have, which I sent a note around about, is with regard to Treasury issuance.  From what Ive heard in this discussion, its not clear what new issuance will take place, because theres so much lack of definition. But somebody used the number $500 billion before in terms of the aggregator bank or the public-private partnership, and a portion of that will be Treasury.  Id just ask if we have an updated sense of how much net new issuance is likely to take place under the $790 billion stimulus package and with the addition of new Treasury commitments, so that we have a sense of the impact thats likely to occur on the yield curve.  Do we have a more refined sense of that presently?  Maybe Bill has an answer. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont have the number. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I dont have the number off the top of my head.  The number is going up, clearly.  Its a couple of trillion dollars, I think. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There are a couple of different numbers that are relevant.  One is gross issuance, which, of course, includes replacement of MR. FISHER. This is net new issuance. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Net new issuance. But there again, there should be some distinction between the TARP issuance, which is asset acquisition, and the other issuance.  But I dont know the number.  We dont have anyone here who knows the number, but we can clearly look into it. MR. FISHER. We have talked about numbers herewe decided at the last meeting not to be precise. But in our discussions with the Treasury and so on, theres no implicit or explicit understanding on their part that we will intervene to a specific degree on the longer end of the curve in the Treasury marketis that correct or incorrect,? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Theyve never raised that with me at all.  No, there is no understanding. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think your summary of the program was very precise, exactly as I understand the program myself as of late last evening.  I think that we have to recognize, though, that Mr. Geithner still has 48 hours, and the program could change in the meantime.  So if the program turns out to be somewhat different than the Chairman describes, thats not the Chairmans doing, thats the Treasury Secretarys doing.  It could be a little bit different at the end of the day than what we have right now, so dont criticize the Chairman if the program morphs a little bit in the final 48 hours.  I dont think its going to change, though, to a great degree. I think that the one area of the program that really needs to be nailed down is the 
 FDIC guarantee programexactly how theyre going to extend that, whether theyre going to modify the cap, and whether the covered bonds are being included.  I think that most of the work, though, on the program now is really on the message.  And I think that our general view of what we saw yesterday was it was a bit scary, it wasnt particularly confidence-building, and it wasnt very clear.   We have a number of people at the New York Fed that are helping with the process, and were trying to do three things: Make it less scary; make it clear that this capital-raising exercise is designed to instill confidence in the banking system by ensuring that the banks have enough capital to withstand the stress scenario, above and beyond what we expect to happen; and, as a consequence of that, make investors look at the program as confidence-building rather than confidence-draining. I think the disappointment for a lot of people that have been working on this exercise is that the program is not as clear and definitive as we would like.  But were going 
to try to make the message as clear and as definitive as we can within the confines of the program. As far as the TALF is concerned, I think that people are going to be a little bit confused about how the TALF fits into this program, because theyre waiting for an announcement on 
Monday about the banking system, and the TALF isnt really about the banking system per se.  Its really about expanding the capacity of the private sector balance sheet to take the pressure off the banking system, basically to help market functioning improve and ease financial conditions. So there may be a little bit of confusion with people wondering, well, is this TALF going to take bad assets off bank balance sheets?  I dont think the TALF is really being built with that in mind.  Its possible some assets could come off the bank balance sheets as a consequence, but were going to need to be clear that the TALF is really not a bank rescue 
   vehicle. Its really more about improving financial conditions in the general economy.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to make one comment about our boards of directors who are concerned about losses in the Federal Reserve System.  Theyre just trying to be good business people. They hear a lot of things, and I think what theyre hearing mostly is actual reported losses on the Bear Stearns portfolio, which has already been marked down, and theyre worried about our arrangements at AIG and Bank of America and 
Citi. So thats what I think is going on. I think the clearer we can be about the fact that were watching it and that we have it under control, the better from that perspective. I just wanted to circle back. Generally speaking, this is, as we expected, a comprehensive plan. It has many moving parts, and many of them seem very reasonable to me.  I think the 
biggest issue that has been brought up today is really this communication issue.  Our near-term concern would be that we really get a bad reaction and create more difficulty this week.  So I dont know if we can think a little bit more about things we could do to mitigate that.  I know that its up to the Treasury Secretary to decide how he wants to make the announcement.  I think theres a lot of political pressure to make a big splash, but maybe making a big splash isnt necessarily the right way to get this to sail off in a smooth direction. One thing on Vice Chairman Dudleys comment that TALF is not really about the banking systemyou could pull that out and announce it at some other time when perhaps it could be better explained and better absorbed.  Its going to be in with a lot of other provisions, so the impact might get lost and people might be confused about what it is.  Im just suggesting possibly theres another time we could announce that. 
  The other thought is about the scrubbing provision thatat least as I interpreted Governor Dukes commentsmight cause a very nasty reaction out there.  Maybe that could be soft-pedaled or done in a way that says that were just thinking about this. The intention of that would be to mitigate some of the potential for a very nasty downturn that might exacerbate the situation and make it much worse.  The signaling effects during this financial crisis have been 
astounding, absolutely astounding. And I think we do need to be very aware of that.  It seems to me thats our near-term challenge for this discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. You should tell your board that, in every one of the cases where we have taken risks, including the wraps for Bank of America and Citi, we have a letter from the Treasury saying that its understood that this is a responsibility of the U.S. government, and that any losses would come out of seignorage.  We havent worked out how that would be done exactly, but the long-term impact on the Federal Reserves capital should be nil based on those representations. MR. BULLARD. I understand, and I think my board appreciates that.  But they also start to ask questions, because the numbers get so large that you start talking about more than we send back to the Treasury in a typical year.  And the crisis seems to be going in unpredictable ways, so I think theyre just trying to be prudent business people on this question.  As long as we have good risk-management in place, I think it would be finetheyd just like to see reassurance on that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I appreciate that. And I guess I would add that seignorage obviously is adjusted over a period of years. We havent done a recent calculation.  Perhaps it would be in our interest to do so.  But I think were probably in the black on balance, because those are the only losses. Everywhere else the lending programs are providing us with some 
    additional interest income. So I think our net seignorage is probably positive.  The Vice Chairman is nodding his head. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. At this point in time. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. At this point in time, anyway.  So I think overall that were doing pretty well in terms of the financial implications for the Federal Reserve and for the government.  Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  We talk about the analysis that weve done in terms of the TALF, and were really establishing the capital that we think we need to hold on these assets, and its presumably based on a loss estimatenot on any estimate of potential market value loss, but of credit loss. The first question is: Are those being done on a stress scenario in the same way that we would apply it to the bank capital needs?  And my second question is:  From an actual and a communication standpoint, when we go in to scrub the banks, might we be looking to scrub the banks particularly from a credit loss standpoint, not necessarily from a market loss standpoint? Based on an estimate of their credit losses, some assets may actually be, in this analysis, worth more than theyre marked on the balance sheet today, and others would be worth less.  Or are we planning to go in there and focus on the worst of both possible worlds, both market value losses as well as credit losses? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. On the second question, I think the idea is just to make sure that everybody is using comparable standards, but not to change the rules.  The rules would be what they are for mark-to-market and for banking book assets.  So on the mark-to-market side, youd be looking to see what the methodologies are and so on, and on the banking book side, youd be looking to see whether reserving is taking place in an appropriate way and whether the 
    estimates of the credit losses are reasonable.  In a sense, it is the worst of both worlds, I guess, but its within the context of the existing accounting structure for banks. Vice Chairman, do you want to respond to the first question? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  On the first question, I think the stress testing is far beyond any other stress test any financial institution has ever had.  I think its one out of 100 years, and then stressed versus that. MR. NELSON. The haircuts are set at 3 percentage points plus four times the estimated losses in a one-out-of-100-years scenario.  But those are credit losses, not market losses. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It is a very high stress scenario.  And if you want to give some numbers, it might be useful. MR. NELSON. To provide some numbersand I think these numbers are included in the memo that was circulated to the FOMCour expected losses are $500 million. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Not ours. Isnt that the whole loss? MR. NELSON. Thats the expected losses for the whole program. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Including for the Treasury. MR. NELSON. The stress losses in a one-in-100-years scenario are $2.4 billion.  So thats to be compared with $6 billion from the interest spreadthats just the spread over LIBOR or over the swap rate. So, even under the stress scenario, we anticipate that no one would lose money. Treasury would make money.  And then, even if those were to be exceeded, wed still have the $20 billion Treasury cushion. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The Treasury could legitimately argue that theyre putting up too much TARP capital relative to their risk. 
   MR. NELSON. It is probably important to add that it is very difficult to know what losses will be under these circumstances.  We have very little to go by to judge what the future is going to be like. The future is pretty uncertain territory right now, but those are our best judgments. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a comment, and Ill try to keep it brief, because I know youve been very generous with your time here, but I have to tell you my thoughts as I look at what were trying to do and the strategy.  The U.S. economy over the last decade has leveraged up incredibly.  The numbers are dramatica doubling of our leverage in the financial sector. Right now were going through the deleveraging process.  And as the leveraging went up, there was enormous misallocation of resources.  So those resources are now shifting back and forth, and there is going to be pain with thatI dont think we can avoid that.  The deleveraging process requires us to acknowledge hundreds of billions of dollars of loss.  The loss is therewe cant avoid itand the need to recapitalize by significant amounts is a fiscal action that we have to take. What were trying to do, if I understand todays meeting and other meetings, is to try to temporize the adjustment processto give us time, or give the Congress time, or give someone timeso that a fiscal stimulus package can help make up the difference, or something like that. It worries me, though, that were doing it through the TALF, because it does further misallocate resources, although I know were trying to make it as broad as possible.  I am confident that we have a major commercial real estate problem coming, and that will bring us againlosses that have to be taken and will put us in the position of having to figure out how were going to temporize and lend, and that may in fact further distort things.  So if we can 
     develop ways that would minimize our involvement, rather than continuing to accelerate it up to $1 trillion, I think we would be well served in the long run, because the loss is there, and the adjustment is going to have to take place.  And if we distort, I think we will only prolong, in the end, some very harsh realities that lie ahead.  Thats my concern, and I know you realize that, but I just have to voice it at this point. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I understand that concern. You often hear people say, Well, we need people to save more.  Why are we taking fiscal policy actions to try to get them to spend more?  Isnt that inconsistent? I would say its not inconsistent, because in the short termIm adopting a New Keynesian framework heresharp adjustments in aggregate demand not only move us towards the long-term desired adjustment, but they also can create excess capacity (loss of use of 
resources) over and above the natural adjustment process that we need in the long run.  So there is a casefor example, when there is a movement from low saving to high savingfor trying to provide mechanisms to maintain something close to full employment as you make that transition.  By the same token, we need to go from high leverage to low leverage.  That process is happening. The losses are occurring. One thing I like about this bank program is that its very honest. I think its a very truth-telling program.  Its not trying to hide things.  But the deleveraging process has a side effect, which is to bring down aggregate demand and to create enormous excess capacity in the economy, which, I think, is partially wasted.  Therefore, there is a social gain involved not in trying to stop this adjustment, or reverse it, but rather in trying to allow the economy to adapt to it in a more gradual way. And Im not particularly persuaded that we are misallocating credit, because I think the credit markets are just not working very well.  There are all kinds of informational and capital 
    and other issues which are preventing the markets from working in anything remotely like a good way. We are trying to use the tools we have to mitigate the implications for the broader economy, not because were trying to affect credit allocation per se, but because were interested in the effect on overall demand and the economy.  You mentioned CRE [commercial real estate], and, by the way, thats likely to be a thing that we would try to address in the TALF context.   So I understand all of the complexities here, and crises are a time when you have to examine orthodoxies and try to think about the complexity of the world.  And were making all kinds of tradeoffs. But I think were better off trying to get to where we need to be in a more gradual and buffered way than allowing the system to go through a violent, wrenching process, which could very easily get us trapped in some Japanese-style situation where the usual dynamic mechanisms for adjustment are strongly attenuated and it takes a very long time.  So I understand what youre saying, but I dont think theres a contradiction between trying to achieve a rationalization of leverage and consumption in the long run and trying in the intermediate term to mitigate the effects of that on aggregate demand and on the broad economy.  I think it is a consistent intellectual position. You may not agree with it, but I think its not inconsistent. MR. HOENIG. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions or comments?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I thought the conventional wisdom about Japan is that it was government action to delay adjustment that led to their stagnation. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I disagree with that.  I think that what happened was that they were very slow in adjusting to the financial crisis in the banking system.  I dont know what youre referring to, frankly. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think the zombie issue. 
 MR. LACKER. Yes, zombie banks, zombie borrowers that werent foreclosed on, an inability to free up resources and pry them out of the hands of bankrupt firms and move them to new productive uses. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, that wasnt government action, that was government inaction. It took a tough guy like Takenaka to confront the banks and force them to write down their positions and to recognize their losseswhich is what I think is the positive virtue of the Geithner approachwhich was the first step to recovery.  People say, Well, fiscal policy was insufficient.  Well, maybe so, but there werent a whole lot of intrinsic dynamics in that economy to restore full employment absent government policy, either.  I view Japan as being a case of mostly insufficient action rather than excessive or incorrect action.  But we dont want to debate that I think in any detail today. MR. LACKER. I know, this could be a long debate.  The scrubbing of the balance sheets is a very strong element in this plan, and I think that its well worthwhile. And I think its really clever to get around these accrual accounting problems rather than address them head-on.  I think it makes a lot of sense to go in and run a shadow regulatory regime around what those assets are really worth. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Other comments? President Fisher. MR. FISHER. May I just take this opportunity to welcome Governor Tarullo on board and give him an option to leave if he decides to do so.  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Richard. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Id like to point out Governor Tarullo has a 14-year term.  [Laughter] MS. DUKE. Sentence? [Laughter] 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A term, not a sentence.  Thank you, everybody. END OF MEETING 
               
 
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on March 1718, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 17, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday March 18, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo 
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Weinberg, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate Economists 
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open Market Account Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors 
      
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________  Ms. Bailey and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Banking Supervision and Regulation and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors  Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Messrs. Leahy, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wascher, Associate Directors, Divisions of International Finance, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Mr. Lewis, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Mr. Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively Messrs. Hilton and Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Cleveland, respectively 
Messrs. Clark, Gavin, Klitgaard, and Yi, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, New York, and Philadelphia, respectively Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis  Attended Tuesdays session only. 
                                                       1 Materials used by Ms. Mosser are appended to this document (appendix 1). Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  March 17-18, 2009 March 17, 2009Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon and happy St. Patricks Day, everybody.  Id like to start by welcoming Governor Tarullo to his first non-video [laughter] FOMC meeting.  Dan has been here for a while, and hes already making very substantial contributions.  Were happy to welcome him to the table.  Ill also mention that we will have a dinner tonight, and our special guest will be Randy Kroszner.  This is a joint BoardFOMC meeting, so I need a motion to close the Board meeting. MR. KOHN. So moved. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  The first item on the agenda is Desk operations and liquidity programs.  The FOMC asked for lots of information, and now youre going to be sorry. [Laughter] We have a record number of presenters who are going to cover a range of issues relating to our balance sheet, our lending programs, and a variety of policy options. In order to make sure this is not a three-day meeting, Id like you to hold your non-clarifying questions till the end. If you have clarifying questions, by all means ask them, but at the end well have an opportunity for full Q&A for the presenters.  So let me turn it over now to Trish Mosser. MS. MOSSER.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Financial market developments during the intermeeting period have been driven largely by three factors:  continued sharp deterioration in global economic conditions, uncertainty and pessimism about the health of financial firms, particularly commercial banks, and reactions to a wide range of unconventional policy measures by many central banks and governments. Despite last weeks rally, as exhibit 1 shows, global equity prices are sharply lower. The S&P 500 has fallen 16 percent since the beginning of the year.  Of course this is much better than a week ago; as of last Monday, the S&P 500 was down 
      25 percent for the year. Foreign stock markets, which had fallen 15 percent to 25 percent from the beginning of the year to a week ago Monday, are now down only 5 percent to 17 percent for the year. This, of course, reflects the deep, nearly global recession which has occurred in response to the financial crisis.  The sharp contraction in credit is now a global phenomenon, resulting in credit losses, write-downs, and financial deleveraging occurring nearly everywhere. Financial firms also had a bit of a respite last week, in part based on predictions of better first quarter earnings, but overall they remain very distressed.  The continued uncertainty regarding both the health of financial firms as well as the nature of government assistance programs has weighed on their capital structures.  As can be seen in exhibit 2, both common and preferred equity indexes for financial firms are down sharply during the intermeeting period.  In fact, preferred equity of financials has fallen more than 20 percent since late January, while common equity prices are down less than 10 percent, reflecting increased risk of suspended dividends or conversion of preferred equity to common.  This trend is even more pronounced for those firms that have already received government capital and, thus, for which the possibility of losses further up the capital structure is perceived to be largest. Perhaps more jarring is the very large widening of financial firms CDS spreads in recent weeks, which can be seen in exhibits 3 through 5.  Bank CDS spreads are now significantly wider than they were during the height of the financial turmoil last fall, following the Lehman bankruptcy. This is truly extraordinary in light of the government programs that have been announced or expanded in recent weeks:  the FDIC guarantee program, the announcement of the Administrations stabilization plan, and several public statements that systemically important firms will not be allowed to fail during the current crisis. The widening of CDS spreads reflects several factors.  First, in the U.S., there is deep concern that the current bank stress assessment will result in actual or de facto nationalization of some institutions; this raises the possibility that debt holders as well as equity holders will take a hit. Second, financial firms with more opaque balance sheetscommercial banks, insurance companies, and some finance companies, such as GE Capitalhave experienced larger increases in CDS spreads.  The lack of clarity about the size of toxic assets and how legacy accrual assets will be marked has led to questions about their viability.  In fact its notable that the CDS spreads of the two former investment banks, which largely mark their balance sheets to market, have not widened in recent weeks, although they remain at very high levels.  Third, market liquidity continues to deteriorate in nearly every market where the Fed has not intervened, including CDS.  Thus, the price impact of even small CDS trades and 
small positions can move spreads sharply; for example, a relatively small number of 
investors continuing to take short positions in financial CDS may be responsible for 
the bulk of the price action in recent weeks.  Finally, and perhaps most importantly, investors are very concerned about whether the strings attached to government assistance for financial institutions or markets will be changed in the future.  In particular, the risk that the rules of the game for debt investors will be changed 
       after investments have been madehas risen sharply in recent weeks.  To quote a member of our Treasury Market Practices Group, the rules coming from Washington change every other day; no one is willing to invest in anything.  Its worth noting that this risk extends beyond investments in banks and is a reason that some investors are not planning to use the TALF, no matter how attractive the economics of the program may be. In response to continued deterioration in both economic and financial conditions, central banks around the world have eased monetary policy conditions to an unprecedented degree in recent weeks.  Of the G-20 central banks, eighteen have eased monetary policy since the beginning of the year.  In addition, exhibit 6 shows that most of the major central banks have lowered interest rates to near zero and embarked on programs to expand their balance sheets through additional liquidity programs as well as credit-easing and quantitative-easing programs.  Credit-easing programs have generally focused on purchases of commercial paper and corporate 
bonds outside of the U.S. In the U.S., the investment-grade corporate bond market is the rare credit market that is operating fairly normally, but this is not the case in many 
countries. The local market responses to these new programssome of which I will discuss in a momenthave generally been positive, but their relative impact globally is harder to discern. In particular, movements in major dollar FX rates (exhibit 7) do not appear to be closely related to changes in policy stance, the degree of central bank balance sheet expansion, or relative economic prospects.  For example, one might expect the euro, or at least the Canadian dollar, to have appreciated relative to the U.S. dollar since the beginning of the year, given the euro areas higher policy rates and the Canadian economys relative stability.  But, in fact, the dollar has appreciated against nearly every major currency since the beginning of the year.  Certainly, the dollars position as a reserve currency and its continued status as a safe haven have contributed to its appreciation. Last weeks intervention by the Swiss National Bank to weaken the Swiss franc relative to the euro (exhibit 8) is one reflection of concern over the deflationary impact of an appreciating currency.  The SNBs intervention last Thursday pushed the Swiss franc down nearly 3 percent relative to the euro in a matter of minutes.  While the SNB does not plan to engage in ongoing competitive devaluations, 
preventing a sharp appreciation of the currency, particularly vis--vis the euro, is a key component in its quantitative-easing plan to prevent deflation. However, the United Kingdom probably wins the prize for the most aggressive quantitative-easing plan, at least in terms of its timetable.  Two weeks ago, the Bank of England announced an asset-purchase program focused on commercial paper, corporate bonds, and government securities.  Given the limited size of U.K. credit 
markets, the BOE announced that the majority of the purchases will be of government bonds, and specifically over the next three months they will purchase as much as 75 billion of gilts in the 5- to 25-year maturity range. 
           The planned BOE gilt purchases amount to 5 percent of U.K. GDP, nearly 12 percent of total gilts, and 18 percent of nominal gilts held by the public.  To put this in some perspective, a similar-sized program in the United States, by these metrics, would entail purchases of U.S. Treasuries ranging from $585 billion up to nearly $750 billion over a three-month period.   Since the announcement, gilt yields have fallen 19, 53, and 79 basis points in the 5-, 10-, and 20-year maturities, respectively, but 2-year yields have risen 38 basis pointsthey are not buying 2-year gilts.  As shown in exhibit 9, most of this was an 
announcement effect.  Interestingly, the spread between the policy rate and the 10-year yield in the U.K. (exhibit 10) did not decline.  In other words, long-term yields have fallen in parallel with the policy rate.  Finally, private credit yields did decline with the policy action, particularly corporate bonds, which the Bank of England will also purchase. However, as noted in exhibit 11, other yields, notably swaps, fell significantly less than government yields, leading to an increase in swap spreads. Turning now to our own asset-purchase programs, we have continued to purchase both agency MBS and debt at a steady pace.  Agency debt purchases now amount to nearly $47 billion and MBS outright purchases total $219 billion, as well as an additional $69 billion in dollar rolls, which I will discuss in a moment.  Exhibit 12 shows that the spreads of both agency debt and MBS to Treasury yields have been 
fairly stable since the last FOMC meeting.  Notably, however, the conforming mortgage rate to households has continued to decline to about 5 percent. There are several reasons for this, including the introduction of our dollar roll program in early March.  In the first week of March, there was a nearly 100 basis point drop in the forward financing rate for MBS relative to the MBS cash repo rate (exhibit 13).  You may recall that the dollar roll market is like a repo market for forward delivery of agency MBS. To give an example, the MarchApril dollar roll 
transaction, which is what were purchasing now, is a transaction that simultaneously purchases MBS for delivery in March and sells identical MBS to be delivered in April. By participating in the dollar roll market, we have lowered the cost of managing mortgage inventory and moved forward financing spreads back to levels 
that prevailed before last falls turmoil. In addition, as the refinancing wave from January abates, mortgage lenders ability to process new mortgages has increased, and they have tended to lower rates to borrowers. Finally, retail spreads, while high, have come down because of the 
improved liquidity and predictability of conditions in the secondary mortgage market.  Since our purchase program began in January, other investors and arbitrageurs have followed us into the MBS market.  Not only are bid-asked spreads lower, but, as 
shown in exhibit 14, the daily price volatility of new MBS has declined steadily, reducing uncertainty about prices at which new mortgages can be sold.  
        While our MBS purchase program has helped to lower MBS spreads from the exceptional levels seen last fall, they remain very high by historical standards, as shown in exhibit 15. In contrast to the Treasury yield curve, which is shown in exhibit 16, mortgage spreads do not appear to have a predictable relationship to the business cycle.  The Treasury curve, while steep, seems consistent with past episodes of economic weakness. In anticipation of Daves and Joes discussion of large-scale asset purchases, exhibit 17 scales our asset purchases so far relative to upcoming new issuance.  To date, the MBS program purchases are very close in size to the overall new issuance in the MBS market.  However, market expectations are for a large refinancing wave during 2009 (the result of low rates and mortgage relief programs).  The median estimate is for $1.8 trillion in new issuance, but estimates vary widelyfrom under $1 trillion to $3 trillion. For comparison, a median estimate of long-term Treasury issuance is also shown. At our current pace of purchasing, we will not keep up with expected new MBS issuance. Finally, I want to say a few words about policy expectations and the impact of our programs.  Exhibit 18 shows the results of the Desks latest survey of dealer 
economists along with market-implied expectations for the future policy rate.  Most dealers continue to expect policy rates to stay close to zero until at least the second quarter of 2010 and to remain below 1 percent into 2011.  Market-implied expectations continue to be skewed upward, but we believe this probably reflects the high risk premiums in future Eurodollar rates rather than an accurate reading of policy expectations. Markets directly supported by Fed programs continued to function reasonably well. However, as seen in exhibit 19, both secured and unsecured money market rates have increased modestly in recent weeks.  The increase in LIBOR rates largely reflects increased credit risk of banks and is consistent with the rise in bank CDS 
spreads. The rise in Treasury repo rates, in contrast, reflects the large Treasury 
issuance and associated ample supply of Treasury collateral for lending. Spreads on consumer-asset-backed securities have narrowed somewhat since the last FOMC meeting in anticipation of the first TALF subscription, which opened 
today. Our expectations for the first TALF subscription are modest, with a few billion dollars of lending against ABS, most likely backed by auto and credit card lending. Bill will be saying more about the TALF in a few minutes. Spence will discuss various aspects of the balance sheet in more detail.  However, I would like to point out in exhibit 20 the continued decline in the size of our balance sheet, as the liquidity programs shrink at a faster rate than our purchase programs increase. On a related operational note:  Demand for borrowing Treasury securities from our term securities lending facility has continued to decline, with operations for both Schedule 1 and 2 collateral consistently undersubscribed.  TSLF operations are very staff-intensive, so we are proposing to reduce the frequency of Schedule 2 
     auctions from the biweekly schedule that was implemented during the market turmoil last fall back to the original weekly schedule.  We plan to maintain the overall size of the TSLF program for the present but will continue to assess whether changes may be appropriate in the future.  Ill now turn it over to Bill Nelson who will discuss the TALF. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish, does that proposal require any approval? MS. MOSSER. It does not, according to the authorizationbut Ill bow to Debbie for greater wisdom on that. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, may I ask just one question on exhibit 17? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Surely. MR. FISHER. This is calendar year 2009? 
MS. MOSSER. Yes, correct. 
MR. NELSON. As Trish noted, the subscription for the first TALF operation begins today.  The loans requested between now and Thursday will settle on March 25, exactly four months after we first announced the program.  Those months were spent canvassing potential ABS issuers and investors to determine the program design characteristics that would be most successful, evaluating the risks of the program and developing the associated controls, and working out the back-office arrangements. Nevertheless, the size of the initial TALF subscription is going to be modest, in part because potential borrowers are uneasy using the TALF to finance ABS purchases. Potential borrowers and primary dealers have largely been unable to work out mutually acceptable customer arrangements.  A particular sticking point seems to be assigning responsibility for the risk that a potential borrower is determined to be ineligible for the program at the eleventh hour, leaving the primary dealer, who is typically the underwriter, responsible for funding the issue.  Investors are also reportedly concerned that participation in the program will expose them to government interference in their business, a fear apparently confirmed on Friday when it became more widely understood that recipients of 13(3) loans will be subject to tighter restrictions when hiring noncitizens.  We are trying to facilitate agreements between potential borrowers and primary dealers, we are seeking to provide as much clarity as possible on the issue of hiring noncitizens, and we are addressing other issues as they arise. We continue to hope that participants will grow more comfortable with the program over time.  I note that revisions to the FAQs to help clarify some issues are going on right now.   The subscription that starts today is for the TALF program as initially announced.  The New York Fed will be extending three-year nonrecourse loans against newly 
         issued triple-A-rated auto, credit card, and student loan ABS and ABS guaranteed by the Small Business Administration.  The monthly operations will continue through this December unless extended by the Board.  The program has a $200 billion ceiling 
and is supported by $20 billion in credit protection from the Treasury. As you all know, the Board is prepared to consider increasing the size of the program up to $1 trillion, supported by up to $100 billion in credit protection from the Treasury. The expansion would entail widening the list of eligible collateral to encompass much of the universe of newly issued triple-A-rated collateralized obligations, for the most part backed by newly and recently issued loans.  Staff at the Board, New York Fed, Chicago Fed, Atlanta Fed, and the Treasury have been evaluating specific asset classes for possible inclusion in the program and have been developing prospective terms and conditions.  We are concentrating first on the 
largest asset classes and will recommend specific categories of securities for inclusion 
on a flow basis as we complete our reviews. As a first step in that expansion, we recommend that the Board approve adding four categories of ABS to the list of eligible collateral, starting with the April operation. The four categories are the first to be recommended because they have relatively straightforward structures similar to those already taken, allowing us to evaluate them quickly. Although they are smaller asset classes than the consumer ABS already accepted, they are the largest among the securities that can be evaluated quickly. The first three are the principal types of ABS that were excluded from the initial program because they are not backed by consumer loans: ABS backed by loans or leases relating to business equipment, ABS backed by leases of vehicle fleets, and ABS backed by revolving lines of credit used to finance showroom inventories.  The fourth is ABS backed by the credit provided by residential mortgage servicers when homeowners miss payments.  Mortgage servicers have found credit increasingly difficult and expensive to obtain.  Accepting the ABS at the TALF should improve the servicers ability to work with homeowners to prevent avoidable foreclosures. All the assets proposed to be accepted will have maturities of three years or less, resulting in a good fit for the three-year term of the TALF loans.  The proposed new collateral classes are of roughly equivalent risk to the types already accepted.  After applying the recommended haircuts, which range from 8 to 13 percent, the risk to the Federal Reserve should be similar to the de minimis risk associated with the types of ABS already accepted as TALF collateral. We estimate that accepting the new 
categories of ABS would increase demand for TALF loans through December by 
$30 billion to $130 billion.  If the Board approves the additions, we would release 
revised terms and conditions and FAQs for the program on Thursday. We are also evaluating the other remaining major collateralized asset classes for inclusion under the TALF, for example, CMBS and non-agency RMBS.  Subject to Board approval, terms and conditions for these asset classes could be announced as 
                                                    2 Materials used by Messrs. Gagnon and Reifschneider are appended to this document (appendix 2).         early as mid-April.  Staff members have held extensive discussions with issuers, investors, and rating agencies about several asset categories and have narrowed down the scope of securities that we might recommend accepting.  For instance, CMBS would likely include those backed by solidly underwritten existing mortgages and by mortgages that are being refinanced, and RMBS would likely include those backed by mortgages exceeding the conforming loan limit and possibly mortgages to near-prime borrowers. Because a number of the assets envisioned for the expansion are more 
complicated than those currently taken or thus far proposed to be taken at the TALF, staff members are planning to recommend that a collateral agent be hired to assist with underwriting and that a portfolio manager be hired to monitor the assets accepted. Staff members are also evaluating the use of the TALF to address the legacy asset problem.  The Treasury has proposed that the Federal Reserve accept at the TALF older securities that were rated triple-A when issued but that may or may not still be rated triple-A. One reason to expand the TALF to legacy assets would be to increase demand for, and hence the prices of, the eligible assets, thereby bolstering the balance sheets of financial institutions. Another reason would be to remove the eligible assets from the balance sheets of their current holders, leaving those firms with cleaner, more transparent balance sheets and an improved capacity to attract new equity from private sources. In the Treasurys proposed structure, the legacy TALF loans have five-year terms, but in other ways the facility resembles the existing TALF. Staff members have analyzed the feasibility of the legacy TALF proposal for a few asset classes, specifically 2005- to 2008-vintage CMBS still rated triple-A and subprime and Alt-A RMBS rated triple-A at origination.  Our preliminary assessment is that, for many of these securities, haircuts and other terms could be set that would adequately protect the Federal Reserve and the Treasury but would nevertheless elicit sufficient investor demand to be helpful.  We have concluded, though, that it would be necessary in some cases to set haircuts on a security-by-security basis.  
Nevertheless, we believe that we could operate the program at sufficient scale and 
with sufficient speed by hiring an outside contractor.   Joe Gagnon and Dave Reifschneider will now discuss large-scale asset purchases. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Before you start, let me just say that Ill give a briefing on the Treasurys plans and all of these issues after the presentations here. MR. GAGNON.2  Dave Reifschneider and I will review the papers on large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) that were sent to the Committee last week.  Considerable evidence indicates that policy-induced changes in the supply of long-term bonds affect bond yields. As noted in the top panel of your first exhibit, a memo circulated to the FOMC last December reviewed the economic literature on this question and 
         reported that a Federal Reserve purchase of $500 billion of long-term Treasury securities could plausibly reduce the 10-year Treasury yield by 20 to 100 basis points.  Such a purchase would also be expected to lower long-term private yields.  Generally speaking, public and private long-term debt markets are closely linked, and correlations of changes in yields across these markets have historically been very high. However, in recent months these correlations have declined noticeably, raising the possibility that spillovers across markets may currently be lower than normal. The middle panel presents evidence on the effects of recent central bank communications on bond yields. On November 25 (the first column) the Federal 
Reserve announced a program to purchase $600 billion of agency debt and agency MBS. On December 1 (the second column) Chairman Bernanke stated that the 
Federal Reserve was considering purchasing substantial quantities of long-term Treasury securities. On December 16, the FOMC stated that it stood ready to expand its purchases of agency securities and confirmed that it was considering large-scale purchases of Treasuries.  On each of these occasions, the 10-year Treasury yield and 
long-term private yields fell substantially.  On January 28, the FOMC did not indicate any change in its stance toward purchasing long-term Treasuries, whereas market participants reportedly attributed a significant probability to such a move.  Long-term yields rose markedly.  None of these moves appears to be attributable to economic news. As Trish mentioned, on March 5, the Bank of England announced that it plans to purchase 75 billion of mainly long-term sterling Treasury securities.  The final column shows that a range of public and private long-term yields fell sharply after the Bank of Englands announcement. Household mortgage rates are quite a bit stickier than yields on traded securities, which makes them unsuitable for inclusion in the table.  However, as shown in the bottom panel, most of the decline in Treasury yields since mid-November (the red line) has passed through to conforming 30-year mortgage rates (the black line).  Ill now turn the presentation over to Dave. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. The top panel of your next exhibit reviews the basic channels through which buying agency MBS or long-term Treasury securities potentially influences the real economy.  The primary mechanism is through a broad improvement in financial conditions.  As Joe discussed, such purchases reduce yields 
on the targeted securities. In addition, the evidence suggests that these reductions spill over to yields on corporate bonds and other long-term instruments; if so, these interest rate movements should spark higher equity prices and a lower real exchange rate. In turn, household spending, business investment, and net exports should 
strengthen in response to lower borrowing costs, higher wealth, and greater 
international price competitiveness. As illustrated in the middle panel, the stimulus from an LSAP program hinges on the extent of financial spillover.  The table shows a sequence of predictions from the 
FRB/US model for the response of real GDP to purchasing a further $500 billion in agency MBS, assuming successively greater spillovers.  As shown in line 1, even 
        though the program is assumed to lower MBS yields and mortgage rates by 75 basis points, the boost to the level of real GDP would be small in the absence of any spillover to other financial markets.  But if, as in line 2, the fall in MBS yields leads to lower corporate bond yields and other interest rates, the boost to the level of real GDP climbs to  percent by 2011.  Expanding the spillovers yet further to the stock 
market (line 3) and the real exchange rate (line 4) more than doubles the amount of stimulus, to roughly 1 percent by 2011. Other simulations, not shown here, suggest that the stimulus provided by purchases of long-term Treasury securities also is highly sensitive to the extent of financial spillover. But if such purchases were to reduce the general level of interest rates, boost equity prices, and lower the dollar, then the resultant stimulus to real activity would be only modestly lower than that provided by an MBS-only program, as indicated in the memo line of the table. As noted in the bottom left panel, these FRB/US simulations do not capture all the potential ways in which an LSAP program could stimulate real activity.  For example, lower mortgage rates could boost home prices, thereby stimulating household wealth and spending. Theoretical calculations suggest that a percentage point decline in interest rates could boost house prices as much as 15 percent; however, empirical estimates suggest that the increase might be closer to 2 percent.  In addition, lower interest rates might, via mortgage refinancing, transfer income to cash-strapped borrowers from more affluent households who are net lenders.  Calculations suggest that such income transfers could provide a modest boost to consumption.  As indicated by the red line in the figure to the right, when refi effects and 2 percent 
higher house prices are incorporated into the FRB/US simulations, the stimulus from a $1 trillion LSAP programevenly divided between Treasuries and MBSrises noticeably. Effects are larger yet if house prices increase by the theoretical 15 percent (the green line). Turning to your next exhibit, these results imply that asset purchases have the potential to compensate for the inability of conventional monetary policy to ease further. As noted to the left, the staff assumes that the federal funds rate will remain essentially at the zero bound for several years, as illustrated by the black line to the right. But unconstrained optimal monetary policy would call for the fed funds rate to fall even lower, were that possible (the red line).  To overcome this shortfall in conventional monetary policy would require additional fiscal and unconventional monetary actions. The middle panels illustrate how the Greenbook outlook for unemployment and inflation might change if the Committee opted to expand the current program of buying agency debt and MBS by either $500 billion (the red line) or $1 trillion (the green line). Under the smaller program, all the additional purchases are MBS; under the larger program, purchases are evenly divided between MBS and long-term Treasury securities. Both programs are assumed to generate a full range of financial spillovers but no boost to home prices or any increase in consumption from 
          refi-related income transfers; in addition, monetary policy in both cases is set optimally, subject to the zero lower bound constraint.  As shown to the left, both programs limit the rise in the unemployment rate and cause it to fall more quickly than in the baseline (the black line).  All told, the larger program fills roughly half of the gap between the staff forecast and what hypothetically would occur under 
unconstrained monetary policy (the blue line).  As shown to the right, both programs would also mitigate the fall in inflation that is projected in the baseline. The bullet points at the bottom offer a few caveats to this analysis.  First, these results depend importantly on extensive financial spillover effects; unfortunately, 
empirical evidence on the size of stock market and exchange rate effects is slim.  Second, gauging the economic effects of further asset purchases is quite difficult under current conditions, even if extensive financial spillovers do occur.  In particular, households and firms may be reluctant to increase spending in the face of so much uncertainty, and credit constraints may limit their ability to respond to 
improved financial conditions; alternatively, cash-strapped households may be more responsive than normal to any boost to income provided by an LSAP program.  
Finally, the effectiveness of an LSAP program in stopping an unwelcome disinflation might be greater than the simulations indicate if large-scale asset purchases directly bolster the Feds credibility.  Ill now turn the presentation back to Joe. MR. GAGNON. Exhibit 4 presents some risks that might arise from expanding LSAP programs.  The most important risk, which is covered in the upper panel, is whether large asset holdings might threaten the Federal Reserves ability in the future 
to achieve its monetary policy objectives.  Spence Hilton will be discussing this issue 
in the context of the overall balance sheet of the Federal Reserve, and Brian Madigan will discuss potential new policy tools to ameliorate this risk.  Large-scale holdings of marketable assets are not likely to constrain the Federal Reserves policy stance in the future. With short-term interest rates pinned at the zero bound, asset purchases provide macroeconomic stimulus, and asset sales provide macroeconomic restraint.  
If it were deemed necessary to raise short-termterm assets appeared to conflict with this goal, these assets could be sold off or potentially used as collateral for reserve-draining short-term operations.  However, outright sales of long-term assets could lead to a financial loss; and some of the tools that could be used to drain reserves without engaging in outright sales are still under development. Moving to the lower panel, even though fiscal revenue is not an objective of monetary policy, it may be of interest to note that LSAPs are significantly increasing the income generated by the Federal Reserve.  This is because the interest rate earned 
on long-term assets is much greater than the marginal interest rate paid on liabilities.  However, by increasing the leverage and maturity mismatch of the Federal Reserves balance sheet, LSAPs increase the volatility of future income. Your final exhibit discusses strategies for pursuing LSAPs.  The upper panel reviews three classes of long-term security that the Federal Reserve is authorized to 
          purchase: Treasuries, agency debt, and agency MBS.  As Dave discussed, under current market conditions, we believe that MBS purchases provide a somewhat greater macroeconomic stimulus than equivalent purchases of the other two classes.  This primarily reflects our view that MBS purchases will reduce private interest rates more than an equivalent volume of Treasury purchases.  However, in light of the considerable uncertainty surrounding our estimates of the spillover effects across asset markets, including a significant share of Treasury securities and a modest share of agency debt in any expansion of Federal Reserve purchases may be a prudent strategy. The lower left panel shows that the spread of mortgage rates over MBS yields rose in December with the surge of refinancing applications.  These two series have been highly correlated in the past. The staff projects that current low mortgage rates and the Administrations new Making Home Affordable program are likely to create another, more sustained, surge in refinancing applications in coming weeks.  As discussed in the panel to the right, there are some potential actions the Federal Reserve could take to hold down the spread of mortgage rates over MBS yields and thus enhance the macroeconomic impact of its policies.  These include focusing 
purchases on new-production MBS to support new loans rather than seasoned loans.  Another possibility, if it were determined to be consistent with the Federal Reserves statutory authority, is selling put options on forward MBS to help mortgage originators hedge the uncertainty of their application pipelines.  Perhaps even more unconventionally, the Federal Reserve could provide some assurance through its communications to the market that low mortgage rates are likely to persist for several 
months or more. This might reduce volatility in rates and thus reduce originator hedging costs. It might also ease the crush of homeowners trying to refinance at the same time, which strains the currently reduced capacity of mortgage originators and puts upward pressure on mortgage rates. Thank you. Nathan Sheets will now discuss foreign currency liquidity swaps. MR. SHEETS. The staff recommends that the FOMC establish swap lines with major foreign central banks that would allow the Federal Reserve to backstop the foreign currency funding needs of U.S. institutions operating abroad. These lines would give the Federal Reserve the same capacity to act as a lender of last resort that our existing dollar swap lines provide foreign central banks. This proposal involves two components.  First, the FOMC would create a new set of swap lines with foreign central banks. These new swap lines would be designed to provide the Federal Reserve access to foreign currency liquidity.  We suggest establishing such lines with the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. We envision that the lines with the BoJ and ECB would be set at roughly $100 billion equivalent, and the lines with the BoE and the SNB would be a little less than half as large.  These central banks have indicated that they are open to establishing such lines with us. 
      Second, the FOMC would need to create a mechanism to transfer the foreign currency received in the swap with the foreign central bank to a U.S. financial institution. We propose that you authorize use of the System Open Market Account to conduct swap transactions for this purpose. This transaction would be structured as follows. An institution that was facing severe foreign currency funding pressures would approach its Federal Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank would then assess the financial position of the institution and the extent of the foreign currency funding need. If in the Reserve Banks judgment a swap was appropriate, the Reserve Bank would initiate a request with the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, which would have delegated authority to approve swap draws.  Requests for rollovers would also be initiated through the Reserve Bank. The Federal Reserve would swap foreign currency to a U.S. institution in exchange for dollars.  The Federal Reserve would charge the institution a fee (which would be equal to the foreign central banks policy target plus an additional charge) and would also take a 3 to 5 percent security deposit in cash. This deposit would protect against a scenario in which an institution failed to unwind the swap and in which the dollars that were received in the swap proved 
insufficient to extinguish our foreign currency obligation to the foreign central bank.  We anticipate that such swaps would be conducted at very short tenors, primarily 
overnight through one week. While we would expect a U.S. institution that faced difficulties obtaining sufficient foreign currency funding in a market abroad to turn first to the foreign central bank, we see three scenarios in which that option might not be available.  First, an institution might have insufficient collateral at the foreign central bank to meet the drain on its funding and be unable to mobilize sufficient resources on its own, perhaps because the U.S. payment system was closed or because the institution was experiencing broader funding pressures.  Second, the foreign central bank might choose not to lend to an institution even in the presence of acceptable collateral; this might reflect concerns about the institutions underlying financial condition or political pressures. Third, the Federal Reserve might wish to provide foreign currency funding as part of an effort, presumably coordinated with other U.S. authorities, to prevent a disorderly unwinding of an insolvent institutions balance sheet. Such lending, of course, would be done in a manner consistent with the constraints of FDICIA and other legal protocols. As I noted at the January meeting, one major U.S. institution has shown particular vulnerabilities regarding its foreign currency funding, but we cannot rule out scenarios in which other large U.S. institutions might run into similar trouble.  There is a related risk that once one U.S. institution shows vulnerability in this regard, other 
U.S. institutions might also then be viewed as vulnerable and that a broader foreign currency liquidity squeeze could develop. In our view, roughly half a dozen major 
U.S. institutions have sufficient foreign operations to be vulnerable in this respect.   These observations suggest that it would be prudent for the Federal Reserve to have the capacity to backstop the foreign currency funding needs of U.S. institutions.  Establishing temporary swap lines with foreign central banks strikes us as a 
       straightforward way to do this. While there is a good possibility that these lines would never actually be drawn on, they nevertheless would provide valuable insurance against the risk of severe stress.     One important issue that we have grappled with is whether the transaction with a U.S. financial institution should be structured as a swap using SOMA or as a foreign currency denominated loan from the discount window.  After considerable deliberation and reflection, we were persuaded that the back-to-back swap structure is the way to go. The Federal Reserve traditionally conducts its foreign currency transactions out of SOMA, and there is no precedent for discount window lending in foreign currencies. A key complication with the discount window approach is getting the foreign currency from SOMA to the appropriate Reserve Bank, since only the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has accounts at foreign central banks.  In addition, systems to record and manage discount window operations were not designed to track loans in foreign currencies. By putting these swap lines in place, we would signal our intention to pursue best practice in homehost relations.  We would be prepared to provide liquidity support to a U.S. institution if the foreign central bank were reluctant to step in.  This could also give us increased negotiating leverage to expect foreign central banks to provide similar support to their institutions operating in the United States. What risks do these transactions pose to the Federal Reserve? The risks attending the swap with the foreign central bank would be nil. As with our dollar liquidity 
swaps, there is no exchange rate or interest rate risk, because these parameters are specified upfront. And the foreign central bank is required to deposit the dollars it receives in the swap at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, so there is no credit risk. As for the transaction with the U.S. financial institution, the Federal Reserve is protected first by the short tenor of the transaction.  Second, the dollar holdings received in the swap could be used to acquire foreign currency if the institution fails to unwind the transaction.  Third, if these dollars prove inadequate to repay the foreign central bank fullyeither because the dollar has depreciated or because of transactions coststhe Federal Reserve will draw on the cash security deposit that the institution has provided. All told, we judge that Federal Reserve resources would be well protected against any financial risks.  We also note the possibility of moral hazardinstitutions may come to depend on the Federal Reserve to meet their foreign currency funding needs, rather than arranging for sufficient funding in the market or mobilizing their collateral for use at a foreign central bank.  However, we have structured these swaps to minimize this risk to the extent possible.  In particular, the size of the fee and the cash deposit should help ensure that the swaps are attractive only as a last resort. Establishing these foreign currency swap lines requires FOMC approvaleither directly or through delegation to the Subcommittee.  We envision that approval by the full Committee would be followed by a press release within 10 days or so and, in any event, would be reported in the minutes.  As such, the establishment of these lines 
                                                          would quickly become public knowledge.  While the staff had previously feared that a public announcement could generate a negative reaction from the markets, the current weakness of confidence toward the banks may diminish this concern.  Indeed, an announcement that this backstop had been put in place could even enhance 
confidence. If in the Committees judgment the announcement effects associated with these facilities would be manageable, then you could authorize these foreign currency swap lines at the meeting today.  However, if you remain concerned about negative announcement effects, then we recommend that the Committee delegate authority to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee to approve these swap lines.  This would enable the announcement to be deferred, pending a time when draws on the lines would actually be made.  There might still be some announcement effects created by reports of an FOMC vote to delegate this authority to the Subcommittee, but it would probably not be seen as signaling the same urgency as an announcement that the 
facilities themselves had been established.  The authority granted to the Subcommittee in this regard would be symmetric to that already delegated to the Subcommittee to negotiate dollar liquidity swap lines.  I conclude by noting that the Bank of Mexico has recently expressed interest in drawing on its dollar swap line with the Federal Reserve.  We are currently working with our Mexican counterparts to better understand the situation in their economy and how they would use the dollars.  These discussions are ongoing, and we will keep you posted as they proceed.  Spence Hilton will now continue our presentation. MR. HILTON.3 Thank you. Im going to review major changes on the Federal Reserve balance sheet since the last FOMC meeting and then summarize some long-run balance sheet analysis that was in the memo distributed last week.  Last week, the Markets Group distributed its first comprehensive report on developments at the various lending facilities and purchase programs over the past intermeeting period, with a discussion of related financial market developments.  That report offers much more detail than I will provide in my remarks. Just ahead of the last FOMC meeting in late January, the total size of the balance sheet was $2.04 trillion, a bit off levels reached just ahead of the year-end.  As shown in exhibit 2, over the course of that last week in January, which included the FOMC meeting dates, assets fell almost $200 billion.  Declines were widespread among the various short-term lending facilities, with the steepest drop-offs in total draws on the swap lines used to fund dollar lending by foreign central banks, and in the commercial paper funding facility. As shown in exhibit 3, for the past several months now, interest rates on alternative market sources of financing available to many borrowers have been below the rates on the facilities themselves.  Ongoing deleveraging of balance sheets has been cited as a factor contributing to reduced borrowing. 3 Materials used by Mr. Hilton are appended to this document (appendix 3). 
            As shown in exhibits 4 through 9 on the following two pages, since early February, lending through many of the short-term liquidity facilities has declined further to one degree or another. Still, these facilities remain a crucial source of funding for some borrowers, despite rate quotes that suggest cheaper market sources of funding. A notable exception to the general trend is the term auction facility, shown in exhibit 7. The volume of propositions at the TAF auctions at the minimum bid rate of 25 basis points has increased some in recent weeks, although total propositions have remained below the total offering amounts. As Trish noted, purchases of agency MBS and agency debt have been steadily rising. Purchases of agency MBS show up in a very lumpy way on the balance sheet, because of market practice to concentrate settlements on select dates, often with a considerable lag. Last Thursday alone, the size of the balance sheet jumped, as about $160 billion of purchase commitments settled, which now leaves the total balance sheet about unchanged from its level just ahead of the last FOMC meeting. In coming weeks, we anticipate that recent patterns in different components of the balance sheet will continue.  There is potential for increased lending through some of the short-term liquidity facilities ahead of the March quarter-end date as a possible stress point.  But apart from the aforementioned increase in TAF auctions, we have not seen this so far.  Meanwhile, our outright purchase programs are set to proceed on a steady upward path. Turning to longer-term prospects for the balance sheet, the memo distributed last week presents illustrative forecasts of the balance sheet out to 2016.  Projections were constructed based on certain economic assumptions, varying degrees of financial stress assumed over the next couple of years, and on policy assumptions motivated by the economic and financial conditions. For simplicity in estimation, the various liquidity facilities, purchase programs, and other balance sheet initiatives are grouped into just a handful of broad asset categories. A baseline scenario was developed using economic conditions similar to those of the March Greenbook, and an optimistic scenario and a stress scenario were built around this case. The methodology was kept very simple given the obvious uncertainties.  But the broad contours of the asset projections are thought to be illustrative of different orders 
of magnitude for the size of the balance sheet that could be realized under several plausible sets of assumptions. Projections for the balance sheet and the asset components for each of the three scenarios are shown in exhibits 10-12.  In the stress case shown in the bottom panel, solid growth only takes hold in 2011, another financial market stress period is 
assumed to occur later this year, and there is a significant total expansion in outright 
            purchase programs.  In this case, the balance sheet peaks at $4.6 trillion in 2010, although most of the growth occurs this year. In the outyears2011 and beyondin all scenarios we assume a natural runoff of assets. Short-term lending at liquidity facilities dissipates relatively quickly.  TALF loans mature on schedule.  And the gradual declines in outright holdings reflect either maturities or prepayments of agency mortgage-backed securities. On the liability side of the balance sheet, apart from some assumed nominal growth in Federal Reserve note liabilities, the offset to asset movements is the level of reserve balances held by depository institutions.  The reserve estimates can provide a sense of the possible size of any need either to drain reserves or to increase reserve demand should the Federal Reserve wish to target short-term interest ratesthe 
federal funds rateusing conventional operating procedures that are typically associated with keeping excess reserve levels near zero. Exhibit 13 shows reserve levels for all three scenarios.  Peak reserve levels reach $3.7 trillion in 2010 in the stress scenario. While it is unlikely that a return to a positive interest rate target would coincide with when reserve levels were at their maximum, that occasion could come unexpectedly quickly nonetheless.  The memo concludes by presenting the various options available to the Federal Reserve for accomplishing this. From October to December 2008, excess reserves were left high, and market rates were considerably below the interest rate paid on excess reserves.  There are good 
reasons to believe that experience may not represent the normal relation between market rates and the rate of interest paid on excess reserves.  Nonetheless, policymakers might be uncomfortable at this point adopting a framework to control market rates by setting the interest rate paid on excess reserves alone while leaving 
excess reserves at high levels. The Treasurys supplementary financing program or authority for the Federal Reserve to issue its own debt would provide considerable capacity to drain reserves, and little additional operational infrastructure would be needed.  Traditional monetary 
policy tools, sales of assets and reverse RPs, could be developed to support reserve draining operations on a much larger scale than ever used in the past.  These could take some time to develop to their full potential, and there is some question about the scale on which these tools could be deployed. Finally, the broad authority to pay interest on reserves that the Federal Reserve now has could be utilized in other ways to shape demand for reserves so as to effectively reduce excess reserves to levels that would allow the Fed to target positive short-term interest rates within a more conventional operating framework.  Here, too, 
some period of time would be needed to develop an effective operating framework using interest-on-reserves authority.  Now Ill turn it over to Brian to conclude. 
                 MR. MADIGAN. As Spence Hilton noted, it could be very useful to have an additional tool for draining substantial volumes of reserves from the banking system and shrinking the monetary base.  Either the issuance of Fed bills or an enhanced supplementary financing program run by the Treasury on behalf of the Federal Reserve could be particularly helpful. The staff has drafted legislative language that would authorize these tools.  Because the Treasury would have a substantial interest in such programs, and because we would need the Treasurys support in advancing such legislation, we have been discussing this subject with the Treasury.  Our presumption is that we would not seek legislation both for Fed bills and for an 
enhanced SFP.  Rather, we and the Treasury together would raise both possibilities with the relevant congressional committees to discuss the substance and the political prospects for each. On the basis of those discussions, one approach or the other would be advanced. To give adequate assurance to the Federal Reserve and to the markets that these tools will provide the capability to tighten monetary policy as necessary and when necessary, the tools would have to be effectively under the Federal Reserves control.  Two possible constraints are of particular concern:  the public debt ceiling, and possible interference by a future Treasury. To ensure that a binding debt ceiling does not disrupt the conduct of monetary policy, Fed bills or Treasury bills issued under an enhanced SFP program would have to be excluded from the debt ceiling.  And to ensure that a future Treasury could not block the implementation of appropriate 
monetary policy, the Federal Reserve either will need to be able to issue its own obligations as it sees fit to carry out its statutory mandate, or it will need to be able to direct the Treasury to do so as its proxy.  However, the Congress may see the exclusion of Fed bills or SFP obligations from the debt ceiling as an unwarranted dilution of the congressional responsibility to appropriate government monies and to authorize the issuance of federal debt.  And we recognize that the Treasury is concerned about the potential for issuance of such securities to interfere with the Treasurys responsibility for managing the public debt.   Draft legislation prepared by the staff would assign the primary responsibility within the Federal Reserve for the issuance of Fed bills or SFP bills to the Federal 
Open Market Committee.  This seems appropriate because the main purpose of the 
tool, as we see it, is to ensure the capability of the FOMC to tighten monetary policy when appropriate. We see Fed bills as a tool on the liabilities side of the Federal Reserves balance sheet that would essentially be symmetric with our asset-side open market operations. The legislation should also address several other key issues.  In that regard, we have included the following specific elements in the draft legislation we sent to the Treasury:  First, Fed bills would be full faith and credit obligations of the United States in order to maximize their acceptability to investors, to make them as close 
        
 
    
 
 
      substitutes as possible for Treasury securities, and to minimize the interest expense of such obligations.  Second, for similar reasons, Fed bills should not be subject to state and local income taxes.  Third, the Treasury has suggested a statutory maximum maturity of Fed bills in order to limit interference with Treasury debt management.  We have recommended a maximum maturity of one year.  Treasury staff members prefer a shorter maximum term.  Finally, we have recommended that the Fed not be required to notify the Treasury a fixed number of days before issuing Fed bills or scheduling issuance of SFP bills, but rather that the legislation indicate qualitatively that issuance of Fed bills or SFP bills should minimize interference with the conduct of the Treasurys regular debt management responsibilities. As President Plosser and others have noted, there are pros and cons to the Fed bills and expanded SFP proposals.  And even with the support of the Administration, the political prospects for such legislation are not clear at this stage. It is possible that the Federal Reserve may need to accept some changes to the draft legislation to obtain passage. One possible change that might help make the program acceptable to 
all interested parties would be a sunset provision under which the authority to issue such obligations expires after, say, five years. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you for a very thorough set of reports.  Out of those reports, there was, I believe, one action item well come back tobesides ratifying the open market operationswhich is the swap proposal that Nathan discussed.  But lets open now for questions to any of the staff.  President Fisher. MR. FISHER. If I can go back to the beginning, or almost the beginning, and ask some questions about the TALF in terms of lessons learnedI understand that Barclays has put together a pass-through certificate program that seems to have some acceptance, at least in the hedge fund community. Could you bring us up to date on that and what it means in terms of the functioning of the TALF?  Does it facilitate it?  Does it make it more complicated?  Did you expect it?  And is it something thats going forward? 
 MR. NELSON. Ill do the best I can. First of all, this is something that weve been allowing the private sector to develop. Its not like some of these other instances where weve worked with the private sector to develop special purpose vehicles like the MMIFF.  These are private sector efforts.  These things first came up in discussions when we were trying to think of ways to make the program useful for real money investors.  Part of the challenge in the TALF is that the objective is to encourage an investor class that normally hasnt invested in asset-backed securities to move into that space, namely, leveraged investors.  Traditionally, asset-backed securities have been held by real money investors, like pension funds and insurance companies.  So we were trying to think of ways that the program could be made more attractive for those investors. One way to do that would be to have a special purpose vehicle purchase the asset-backed securities and take the loan and raise the haircut part of that transaction by issuing equity.  That equity could conceivably be a tradable security which could be invested in by real money investors. When we looked at that a month or so ago, it didnt necessarily seem as if it was going to be successful, though my understanding is that it has gotten more momentum in recent weeks.  In 
particular, the one thing that I think would really make it take off would be if those equity tranches could be rated by the credit rating agencies, and I am not sure where that effort stands. Another reason these special purpose vehicles came up was our requirement that we only lend to U.S. entities. Many hedge funds are actually foreign entities, but we viewed it as acceptable (and I may not get this exactly right) if there was a U.S. arm of that entity with a U.S. operationan actual person, a manager therethat would be a U.S. entity that we could lend to.  So to some extent there was an effort to set up vehicles along those lines. Then, lastly, there has been interest in potentially insulating the financial institution from some things like the H-1B 
  visa issue that I just mentioned or some other consequences of the program itself.  I dont think any of these things are likely to be moving forward for this subscription, but rather they are continuing to be reviewed by the private sector and being developed. MR. FISHER. But just so I understand this, lets assume that this proceeds.  I perceive it as having significant momentum in the investment community.  The SPVs would be performing basically a clearing function. They create a CUSIP-identified tradable security.  The people that could buy those securities would not have to worry about all the ramifications of the TARP in terms of the political ramifications that seem to be spooking the hedge fund and other communitiesis that correct? MR. NELSON. Well, its not clear, and I think thats the rub right now.  The folks that are concerned about compliance, I think, have written our regulations to say we will look through such structures to the ownership entity to make sure that the compliance protocols have been followed. On the other hand, when we say whom were actually lending to, I think that language has been more along the lines ofin particular, say, for whether or not its a U.S. entityits okay to set up one of these entities.  And because those two efforts are not yet completely lined up, thats why I believe these things are still under development and there are still open questions that need to be answered before its clear that they will be able to go forward. MR. FISHER. Would you say that this search for new engineering is a function of the discomfort of the hedge fund community and the investment community with the TALF, given the TARP restrictions that are placed on top?  Im just trying to understand where this came from. MR. NELSON. I think it came up for several of these reasons.  Thats certainly one of them. 
   MR. FISHER. But I can see where this could also certainly be suspicious politically.  Im just trying to understand how this TALF thing is going to unfold, because there seems to be some momentum in this direction, at least from the standpoint of Simpson Thacher, who are the lawyers behind it. Forget about the dealer relationship to the Fedits between the dealers and the investment community where theres still this odd linkage here.  Its becoming increasingly complicated. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In terms of the order, I think the SPV was initially a device so that real money investors could get involved in the TALF.  But then, as all the political considerations became more severe over the last couple of weeks, people thought, well, hey, we could also use it for this second purposeto provide some distance from the government and the 
TARP restrictions. But the original impetus was for real money accounts. MR. FISHER. One of the reasons Im raising it is that I think weve got to be careful not to get the cart before the horse here, and in the presentation, I realized, just looking down the path, were talking about legacy assets.  Were going to have to get the first setup correct before we go further down the path. At least I would recommend that to the Committee. MR. NELSON. Yes, and we have remained very focused on that. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats very good advice.  President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Just a clarifying question. Can you quickly give me a matrix that says what TALF issuance were talking about and how much, starting with the original $200 billion and then the various add-ons, up to the totaljust so I understand what were talking about in each issuance or expansion of the TALF program? MR. NELSON. At this time, our estimate is that, over the life of the program, the collateral that was approved initiallythats beginning today, and thats consumer ABS and 
    Small Business Administration ABSthat should amount, we think, to $100 billion.  So we wont make it to $200 billion unless the program is expanded.  The additional asset classes that weve proposed to the Board for inclusion, which would largely complete the asset-backed securities space, as well as mortgage servicer advances, would add another $30 billion.  So those combined would still not bring us to $200 billion. The rest of the analysis is really very tentative. So our effort is to be as inclusive as possible, and were looking at the major collateralized high-quality asset classes. MR. HOENIG. This would go all the way to legacy commercial-mortgage-backed securities? MR. NELSON. No. At this point I was thinking in terms of newly issued securities. MR. HOENIG. Newly issued. Okay. MR. NELSON. The range that the teams have provided goes from $50 to $500 billion depending on a number of issues, including whether or not warehouse financing is available, whether or not investors can grow comfortable with the rather extreme mismatch between the maturity of the TALF loans and the maturity of the underlying securities. So that last step conceivably would still not take us to the $1 trillion.  But it is, I must say, very uncertain because theyre still just scoping out those securities.  Now, legacy assets would then add on to that. MR. HOENIG. Thats helpful. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have several questions and a comment at the end. First, a compliment to the New York staff:  I thought that the material distributed ahead 
of time outlining all of the asset programs was very informative, very well laid out, and very 
succinct. My compliments to you on that work. 
   I have a question for Ms. Mosser. This has to do with the comparison between a program of agency and MBS purchases like weve been pursuing and what a program of U.S. Treasury purchases would look like.  My understanding is that you plan your announcements and the size of your purchases a little bit in advance.  Would we get any more flexibility by using Treasuries rather than MBS or are they pretty much the same?  Would you get a little more flexibility to vary the size of the purchases week to week? MS. MOSSER. Its a different kind of flexibility.  In the mortgage-backed securities program, although we do buy across the curve in all coupons, we are focused very much on the TBA, or the forward delivery market, which trades weeks and months in advance of delivery.  If thats the market that youre trading and buying in, you have a huge amount of flexibility from day to day to respond to prices in that market and just to buy more forward contracts or fewer or do a dollar roll and offset some of those if you have to.  But then on delivery day you get, as we did last week, $160 billion of securities.  So in that sense of flexibilitycan you respond daily to market events, for example, tighter spreads, narrower spreads?its very easy to do.  Thats a very deep, liquid market; its a very homogeneous market, even though what you get delivered is fairly heterogeneous. In the Treasury market, its a different kind of flexibility.  We can buy in various parts of the Treasury curve.  In the mortgage market, its very hard to move around the mortgage yield curve easily, but its easy to do that in the Treasury curve.  So Im not quite sure what you mean by flexibility. If you mean sheer quantity, theyre probably about the same. MR. LACKER. Let me follow up.  When you buy Treasuries, when you do a coupon pass, do you settle the same day or next day? MS. MOSSER. Next day. 
MR. LACKER. Next day. These MBS and agency securitiesthey settle once a month? 
 MS. MOSSER. Several times a month, but yes.  It depends on the type of security, but yes, basically once a month. MR. LACKER. I see. So if I looked at it from the point of view of what happens to bank reserves, its just a once-a-month hit. MS. MOSSER. Well, its once a month per type of security.  So there are actually several days a month. MR. LACKER. I see. So its staggered. MS. MOSSER. But its very periodic and very, very predictable when theyre going to settle. MR. LACKER. Right. For Spence, I was very interested in the forecast of the balance sheet, and weve been talking about that for the last couple of meetings.  You have the forecast going up in a straight line to the end of the year, and I take it thats just because you forecasted the end-of-year balance sheet, right? MR. HILTON. Yes. 
MR. LACKER. Do you have a sense of what its going to do between now and the next meeting?  Have you done that exercise? MR. HILTON. Not really systematically in the way this is put together.  Our sense, though, between now and the next meeting, is that what were going to be buying is fairly predictable. Im not sure what the settlement dates are, but if the settlement dates were smooth, we would be expanding pretty much at the same pace.  Id expect the liquidity facilities, though, to hang out where they are and maybe, on balance, come off a little bit further, barring some sort 
of a stress period. So I would anticipate that were predominantly in an expansion phase right now. 
  MR. LACKER. So, in principle, if I asked you to write down numerically, as you did for the end of the year, a forecast for the monetary base at the next meeting, say, you could do that? MR. HILTON. Yeahwith a nice confidence interval. MR. LACKER. Subject to the usual caveats. [Laughter] A question for Mr. Nelson.  You named a bunch of asset categories that youre considering for the TALF.  What criteria are you using to pick those asset classes? I mean, what sort of principle or objective is driving those choices? MR. NELSON. Our objective is to take as broad a set of assets as possible, consistent with choosing ones that can be taken efficiently, that we can figure out ways to take with acceptable risk to the Federal Reserve System and to the government. MR. LACKER. But just ABS, right? 
MR. NELSON. Well, all collateralized assets. 
MR. LACKER. Oh, collateralized assets. Okay. MR. NELSON. But of relatively simple, straightforward structures, so that we can manage and understand the riskbut, nevertheless, as wide a group as possible.  Were just on the way to that at this stage. MR. LACKER. Okay. Im just curious.  Its sort of striking.  The original impetus involved certain securitization markets, where I thought we were motivated by particular observations that suggested distress. Are the problems we see in markets widespread across securitization? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Separate from conforming mortgage markets, where we have a different program, all other ABS markets, to my knowledge, are pretty much shut down. 
    MR. LACKER. And then a question for Mr. Sheets.  You talked about moral hazard. This institution that you talked aboutor any institution in this categorypresumably has overseas operations in which they have liquid liabilities and less liquid assets? MR. SHEETS. Correct. MR. LACKER. And I think we talked about this at the last meeting, right? Thats where you first briefed us on this. MR. SHEETS. Right. 
MR. LACKER. So, over that periodits been almost two months nowcould an institution like that have reduced its vulnerability to the possibility of having a funding problem in another currency? Could it have let its deposits run off, maybe sell the assets upstream to the parent? And if thats true, then wouldnt the presence of this program influence an institutions incentives to take steps in the weeks ahead to protect against potential funding problems? MR. SHEETS. Thats obviously a profoundly important question, and let me just address it at several different levels.  In terms of the specifics of that particular institution, one of the things thats been a challenge for us is to get good datafor a range of such institutions.  So its hard to state categorically what this institution or other institutions have done with their balance sheets over the last couple of months. But I do think its very telling that in mid-February the stresses on the financial sector and the banks were, if anything, even more pronounced than they were in mid-January.  Yet we 
didnt hear the same kinds of reports, and we didnt observe the same stresses as in January, which may very well point to exactly the phenomenon that youre indicating herethat the institution did things to reduce its vulnerability to these sorts of pressures.  So I think that is going on, absolutely. 
   That raises the question of whether this sort of a facility would dull those sorts of incentives. As I said in my remarks, weve done everything we possibly can to structure this in such a way that it would be attractive to an institution only as a very last resortthe fees that were charging, the additional collateral, and so on and so forth.  Nevertheless, we can imagine instances where the drain on the foreign currency funding might be very intense, and even a well-managed institution might have problems raising sufficient collateral and resources on its own. We can also imagine instances where the foreign central bank is not enthusiastic about lending against even good collateral for an institution.  The Bank of Japan, in particular, remembers an instance from the late 90s when the Federal Reserve was not enthusiastic about lending to Japanese institutions because of what were perceived as political pressures in the United States, and theyve asked us to consider the possibility that something similar might happen to them, and they wouldnt be able to lend to U.S. institutions.  So notwithstanding the moral hazard risk, which, as I said, weve done everything we can in this proposal to attenuate, we still see that there would be plausible states of nature where it would be prudent to have these foreign currency swap lines in place. MR. LACKER. If I could just follow up, Mr. Chairman, I take it that the institutions, the half dozen you referred to, are bank holding companies in the United States. MR. SHEETS. Yes. MR. LACKER. What steps have we takenparticularly regarding the one you referred to as being especially vulnerableto encourage them to reduce their vulnerability to funding risks in foreign currencies? MR. SHEETS. I would have to defer to the regulators.  I dont know if Trish has some information. 
  MS. MOSSER. I also would defer to the supervisors on this.  But we have had conversations with the supervisory teams of a couple of these institutions (not just the one) since we decided that it was worth investigating, and nearly all of them are deleveraging abroad as they are deleveraging here and attempting to reduce their liquidity risk.  I think that eliminating that risk in a really short period of time is probably unrealistic, considering the size and scope of operations, including very traditional banking operationswhich, we all know, are subject to runsthat several of these institutions have in many countries.  And many of those countries do not have, for example, the deposit insurance schemes that the United States does, which means the institutions are more vulnerable there.  I think the possibility of completely shutting down and eliminating the risk in a short period of time is probably unrealistic, although movement in that direction is a good idea. MR. LACKER. Is it our sense that theyre doing all they could? MS. MOSSER. My impression is that they are moving in that direction.  I wouldnt superimpose my views over the supervisors about whether theyre doing everything they can. MS. BAILEY. Im not quite sure how to frame all they can.  I think the supervisors particularly with the company thats probably the most international of allhave clearly gone through their funding. It has set up appropriate funding mechanisms within those countries where they are being looked at, and they have taken good significant steps to try to address some of the vulnerabilities. Theyve had outreach meetings with the different central banks.  So during the last year, they have actually been taking a lot of aggressive steps to try to minimize the vulnerability associated with that.  But some of the organizations are big purchasers in foreign currencies. We just cant shut that down that quickly, nor do we expect to.  Its just not a 
   believable strategy for that funding mechanism.  But theyre looking more broadly both at the U.S. and abroad. MR. LACKER. I guess Im looking not for shutting them down, but for measures that could reduce the funding vulnerability, the liabilityasset mismatch that gives rise to the risk. MS. BAILEY. They absolutely have been not only looking at those strategies, but also executing those strategies. MR. LACKER. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A procedural question. We had seven presentations. Are we just going to do questions for now? Are we going to have an opportunity 
to do a sort of go-around? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There will be a discussion period as well.  This is just for questions. MR. PLOSSER. I just wanted to go by the rules.  On the large-scale asset purchases, I have a couple of questions about some of the underlying assumptions.  I was struck by the fact that the assumption was that, under an MBS purchase of $500 billion, the rates on corporates and Treasuries also go down. But the net effect of that, given the assumptions you made, was that corporate spreads rise by 20 basis points, whereas under a Treasury bill purchase, corporate spreads fall by 20 basis points. Im puzzled about what model generates that kind of differential effect, and how much that might be driving some of the stimulation results that youve got.  Im a little puzzled about what driveswell, I know what drives it; the numbers you put down drove itbut I didnt know whether you thought that was internally consistent or whether there were economic mechanisms that you thought that was consistent with. 
  The second question I had was about the assumptions about the elasticities.  Youve got a mortgage-backed security market thats $7 or $8 trillion, somewhere in that neighborhood, youve got a $500 billion purchaseso thats a little less than 10 percent of the marketplace and you get a 75 basis point effect, whereas for long-term Treasuries youve got less than $2 trillion total and you do a $500 billion operation, and you only get a 30 or 50 basis point effect.  So there youre participating in almost a third of the market, and in the other case only about 10 percent. It may be true that those are the right elasticities, but Im wondering where those came from.  To get any effect in some of this stuff, youve got to have some sort of market segmentation going on so that you can play the yield curve game a little bit. The other question on that topic was related to President Lackers question.  The presumption of these programs, particularly the mortgage-backed purchases, is that theres something amiss in the markets, that were trying to fix some intermediation problems, or there are some dysfunctions in those markets.  And yet it seemed to me that, as you expanded the so-called spillover effects and they got bigger and bigger and bigger, it goes against the very presumption of why you wanted to be in these markets in the first placeto try to promote intermediation and liquidity.  So I didnt know how these two assumptions connected or reconciled with one anotherhow you could get both large spillover effects and maintain the 
presumption that these markets were dysfunctional. I wasnt quite sure how those two pieces fit together. On the swaps, following President Lackers comments, I had some of the same questions.  It seems to me that you offered three reasons why these swaps might be needed.  One was this 
issue of not having enough collateral in the foreign country for the central bank to do the lending it wanted to do, and the second reason was the foreign central bank maybe wouldnt accept the 
     U.S. banks collateral.  But the other reasons really had to do with the solvency of that institution. It seems to me that, from an operational point of view, if a bank is insolvent, its not clear we ought to be lending to them in the first place, so Im not sure thats a reason to be in this business. And given that it only applies to perhaps four or five banks, if its really a liquidity problem, it seems to me that doing this through the discount window is a much more natural way to think about what it is were doing and the problem were trying to solve.  You offered some concerns about how difficult that would be. I guess none of those seemed insurmountable to me.  And the fact of the matter is that we would probably be doing most of this lending out of New York anyway, so its not as if youre going to have to worry about lots of the Reserve Banks necessarily having to get foreign currency. It just seemed to me that it might be a better way to go because (a) we do not want to lend to insolvent institutions and (b) the discount window seems appropriate for exactly that liquidity problem rather than designing another facility. The last question I have is about the announcement effects.  I worry that this is going to be interpreted by the markets as a veiled or not-so-veiled attempt to support one institution.  I think the markets will see through that very quickly.  I dont know how to mitigate that if we decide to do it.  It could be viewed as a less than transparent effort on the part of this institution to support a particular institution, and I think that, in turn, may damage our credibility and damage our reputation in the marketplace.  I think if an institution is in trouble and we make the decision to help it in some way, then we ought to do it on its merits and not try to back door that solution through another mechanism.  Thank you. MR. GAGNON. If I could start with the first couple of questions, I think our views have been evolving somewhat as weve been working on this.  When I looked at the literature while I was working on the December memo, there wasnt an agreed-upon way to normalize or scale 
  purchases like this. So what I did at the time was to take the most common approach, which was to look at the total size of the market across all maturitiesand that was about $5 trillion for U.S. Treasuries. The idea was to consider a purchase over a broad range of maturities at the long end, say, maturities of more than three years, but I didnt fine-tune it to segments or look at just the long end per se. You might want to do that. MR. PLOSSER. If you want to get a lot of response, it seems to me youve got to think about it as a segmented market of some kind. MR. GAGNON. I have been moving in the direction that youre thinking of about whether there are differential effects, but theres just not an accepted view in the literature on how to do thisit isnt even really discussed very much.  On the MBS market, if you take MBS and agency debt together and then net out the agency holdings of MBS, you get about $7 trillion.  But its not clear you should merge them in that way; if they were each treated separately, as two 
separate marketsagencies and MBSthose would each be smaller.  I wasnt sure, I threw up my hands and said, well, its roughly the same size.  Thats how we got the $500 billion treated that way in each market.  Since we wrote the December memo, Treasury debt has gone 
up a lot; and its noted in our latest memo that, in fact, the range we get, which is quite large 
20 to 100 basis pointswould need to be shifted down some, given that about $1 trillion of Treasuries have been issued just since we wrote the earlier memo.  So the ground is shifting beneath our feet. And I didnt really pay attention to that until quite late in the process.  But these ranges are quite large. We just dont know within a big range where the answer is. One final thing before I let Dave jump in is, given all of that, we still thought purchases of MBS, especially initially, would have a bigger effect on MBS yields than purchases of Treasuries would have on Treasury yields, because the MBS market was strained and spreads 
   were unusually high. We thought we could push the spreads down.  And theyre still on the high side historically, so there is still, I think, some scope to do that.  And if you keep going down that road, presumably, the scope to do further improvements of spreads does diminish.  In terms of your question, we have the effect of MBS purchases lowering the corporate spread to Treasuries.  Dave, is that right? And we have Treasury purchases raising the corporate spread.  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes. MR. GAGNON. So, again, we thought buying private assets would reduce private spreads generally to some extent, whereas buying Treasuries, which are the favored asset, 
actually might widen spreads. MR. PLOSSER. Why is that?  Because the market would anticipate that we may go in and buy those other private assets, such as corporate bonds? MR. GAGNON. The thought was that the Treasury purchases would be taking a safe haven out of the market and then that would lower Treasury yields more than other assets, so it would widen spreads. For MBS purchases, it seemed to us that just generally youre helping remove private sector assets, so it should help all private sector assets relative to Treasuries. MR. PLOSSER. Its just a funny distortion, it seems to me. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. There is a funny distortion, but I think in some sense it can almost be a distraction.  One of the problems we had wasand we talked about this when we wrote this downwhether we should stick with this bigger own-yield effect on MBS than on Treasuries. And our sense isI hope it came out in the memoswe dont really know what the direct own-yield effects will be.  We had sort of an experiment on the first $500 billionwhats 
the second $500 billion going to be? So theres this issue of scale that could change quite a bit as 
  you go through time.  Whether there are spillover effects from MBS into Treasuries or into high-grade corporatestheres a huge uncertainty about that.   And for that reason, I think you shouldnt interpret the model simulation evidenceto the extent it is evidenceas suggesting, oh, MBS is the way to go because you get a much bigger bang for your buck on that than you would for Treasuries.  I dont think thats the way to interpret it at all. I think the way to interpret the model simulation results is that buying large amounts of these securities, whether its Treasuries or MBS, has at least a fighting chance of bringing down the general level of long-term interest rates.  And if you can do that, and if that spills over into the stock market, the exchange rate, that sort of thing, then you potentially get a major stimulus to the real economy. If the program just becomes narrow on one particular marketsuppose you just drive down MBSthen you might not get very much for that.  Maybe you would get a little bit moremaybein the case of MBS, because then youre affecting mortgage rates and refi effects and house pricesmaybebut its not really where the big payoff comes from, at least as far as these particular stimulations go.  The big payoff comes from general reductions in the level of all long-term rates, and then these other things follow.  So we thought that was 
important.  Thats really the main way to think about the program. MR. PLOSSER. What I was trying to get at was this issue that the payoff is lowering all long-term interest rates.  And your assumption is that youve got this differential spread effect.  Is that driving this notion that buying MBS might be differentially better? Why wouldnt you just buy Treasuries and get the spillover? MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Right. Joe and I may part company here, but I dont think theres a strong case that buying MBS is definitely more advantageous than Treasuries.  I think 
   we just dont know enough about what size the effect is.  There are reasons to think that it might be bigger in the case of MBS, but its very difficult to say. MR. GAGNON. I would just note that MBS yields have come down a lot more than Treasury yields over this period, so that would support our view.  Whether that would continue for the next $500 billion or the $500 billion after thatmaybe not. MR. PLOSSER. Well, that really prompts the other question:  Whats the appropriate way to think about the scales of these operations?  How do we think about diminishing returns in these markets? MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Its anyones guess, and its also the case, as Joe said in his remarks, that the more you focus on one market, the more youre not really taking a diverse strategy on something in which its not quite clear how this is going to play out.  Also, the more you focus on one market, the more the question arises at some point:  Do you just decouple that market from everything else? I think the second question that you raised had to do with this issue of fixing market dysfunction and whether that was a potential conflict if you were getting this better economy.  Although we thought of the bigger MBS effect as maybe having potentially a somewhat bigger bang for the buck, because it might be helping to ease certain market strains, we thought in all cases that the reason for this policy is not to deal with the strains of financial markets per se.  It may have that effect by strengthening the economy and so on and so forthan indirect effect but the main purpose was to get around the zero bound by driving down the average level of long-term interest rates and getting other general financial conditions to improve. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish, did you have a comment? 
  MS. MOSSER. Yes, I had a comment about how long this goes on.  It seemsboth from our MBS purchase program and from the U.K.s announcementthat a huge amount of the interest rate effect happens on announcement, not on execution.  It doesnt grow over time as the purchases get bigger and bigger and bigger. Boomthe rates fall.  Discerning spread changes from the purchase levels is very tricky business, and so is the macro effectI wouldnt venture there. But that announcement effect happens because of the assumption that the central banks are going to keep buying for a while, not that theyre just going to do it for a month or two and then stop the program and go away.  I am fairly certain that in the U.S. well see that reaction in mortgage spreadsif the determination was made to stop in July, the forward rates in July would pop right up and wed be back to approximately where we were in January.  Theres a question 
already arising about what the Bank of England is going to do after three months. MR. PLOSSER. Well, uncertainty about our policies really creates a lot of problems. MS. MOSSER. Yes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Id like to congratulate you on being a tough taskmaster, with having us sit and listen to an hours worth of briefings without any questions.  I had seven, but Im down to three now.  [Laughter] And Ill be jumping around, too, because of 
that. Id like to ask a question of Dave Reifschneider first, having to do with exhibit 3 on the inflation forecast under large-scale asset purchases.  Let me mention at the outset that Ill reveal later on in this meeting that Im not overly concerned about inflation, but having seen this chart, Im suspicious of this, and its in the way that the analysis is done.  As I read the Bluebook, it seems that the unconstrained optimal policy has inflation rising because inflation expectations rise, and you have inflation expectations depend on errors in the Taylor rule, as I understand it.  
   So Im guessing that the model is seeing very accommodative monetary policy and translating that into increases in inflation expectations, and thats why inflation is up.  Now, Im going to guess that you do not have that same effect in these other forecasts. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes. MR. EVANS. And that makes no sense to me because the whole point is to replicate an accommodative monetary policy.  So I would have come up with some translation of how 
accommodative and unusual this is and tried to feed this into it. Success would be when you 
come up with a nontraditional policy that matches that the unconstrained outcome, because thats what were trying to do with the optimal policy. My guess is that, if you went back and were successful, this inflation outlook would have more overshooting, right?  Over 2 percent. So I dont think we can rely too much on that chart. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I agree 100 percent.  When we were doing the Bluebook box, we had this discussion. We saw that this is a real limitation of the modelthat in one case it gets to learn off of what the fed funds rate is doing relative to the rest of the economy, and in the other case it doesnt know how to learn off of these large-scale asset purchases.  So we said, what are we going to do about it? Do we just write something down?  Do we try to come up with the correct fix?  And the answer was, we had ideas for how to fix it correctly, but there is no 
way were going to figure out the right way to do this in a week.  So you are exactly correct. MR. EVANS. I like the model analysis.  I think its very useful, and I think this is just a limitation, and thats how everybody should interpret it, because youre doing a great job on the unemployment rate here.  That sort of tips you off. Let me jump to the balance sheet scenarios, because I looked at those scenarios, but didnt see one that, in light of disinflation risk, I would like to see. If it were costly to have one 
 more, I would drop one of the others instead.  The ones that Id like to see are where the Committee finds itself in a position where we need to raise rates, but we have a lot of sticky assets on our balance sheet, were not quite sure how to address that, and we dont get legislative relief. While I do not put a high probability on this scenario, I think its important to understand it. What if inflation expectations rose?  I think it would have to be an exogenous increase something that is not currently imbedded in my thinking and in the model analysis herebut, what if?  Certainly a lot of people are out there looking at our balance sheetI think incorrectlybut theyre looking at it and saying somethings going to get out of hand.  So if we could see a scenario like that, including how we would have to grapple with balancing the conflicts, it would be very informative.  Thats more of a suggestion. Finally, I have a relatively elementary question about the TALF:  What is the value-added of the investor in the middle in this entire transaction? Were bringing hedge funds to the table, and Ive thought, well, theyre going to help with price discovery to make sure that this issuance is really right, but I dont know that thats really a strong role.  Theres a lot of private capital on the sidelinesaccording to what everybody tells usand theyre going to bring a very small part of it to the transaction.  But what they are demandingI hear from everybody I talk toare very high levered rates of return, which hedge funds are typically associated with delivering. This is going to be in relatively low-risk transactionstriple-A.  Were not expecting to lose on them, but we could. But what does this mean?  Were hoping this will kick-start a secondary market.  Its that kick startI dont know where that comes from.  Theres capital on the sidelines. What will bring it to the table?  I would guess that they would start by looking at this and saying, Well, the safest investment has 20 percent rates of return.  So from here on out the risk curve, the rates 
  should be higher. Im already hearing from a lot of contacts that this is very expensive, that they have to deliver this, and theyre not sure if they are going to participate very much. Is the riskreturn frontier in some sense being moved up by this program?  Will competition really bring these returns down?  Thats what we always think, but I dont know where competition is going to come from, because its on the sidelines.  I really have to understand why its on the sidelines and why it will now be forthcoming. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you think theres an aggregation externality in liquiditygetting activity going again so that people issue and so on?  That would be one reason why it would stimulate additional activity. MR. EVANS. Yeah. It seems like a hope at the moment.  And Im not opposed to hoping a lot. [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think thats our best tool right now.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back to Mr. Sheets.  Ive followed a few international liquidity crises over the years, and they often start in strange places, and my question is: Do we need to think about exotic currenciescurrencies in which there is not really a dollar swap or foreign currency swap market that could provide funding, but where the institution in mind may have pretty sizable book?  The idea would be to try to nip something in the bud before it gets to a hard currency. MR. SHEETS. This is an issue Ive actually spent a fair amount of time thinking about.  Absolutely, its a concern. For instance, one of these major institutions has a fair amount of exposure to some of the secondary and tertiary emerging Asian currencies.  But the staff simply didnt feel comfortable recommending the establishment of, say, 30 or 40 or 50 swap lines with foreign central banks. We see this proposal as providing a foreign currency backstop for these 
   institutionsa safety net of some stripewhich, hopefully, between giving them access to yen or euro or whatever the case may be, and their dollar holdings, would enable them to respond to stresses in some of these secondary markets.  I note that there is a risk.  We dont see it as being significant, but theres a risk that these institutions might mobilize collateral from some of these markets where there is liquidity support into some of these secondary markets; hence becoming more dependent on our liquidity facilities. But we didnt see any way around leaving some residual liquidity risk. Its a thorny, thorny issue. Mr. Chairman, President Plosser asked several questions about the swap lines.  Could I go ahead and answer those? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Sure. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you. 
MR. SHEETS. First of all, let me underscore that we see these lines as being focused primarily and exclusively on liquidity.  What we have in mind in that third case is that an institution has been declared dead and is out of business; were suggesting in that sort of a scenario, it might be useful for the authorities to have access to foreign currency liquidity in the process of winding up the balance sheet and ensuring an orderly wrap-up, consistent with all of the legal protocols and so on. Were not advocating a loan to an institution thats actually insolvent as if it were a solvent institution. Your second question was on the discount window versus the SOMA approach or the swap approach. As I said in my remarks, its something we spent a lot of time deliberating.  On the one hand, there are certain aspects of this that have a discount window flavor.  On the other hand, theres no history of the discount window doing foreign currency operations. MR. PLOSSER. Weve done a lot of things without much history.  [Laughter] 
   MR. SHEETS. On the other hand, SOMA is where weve done all of those foreign currency operations, and at the end of the day, operationally, we just saw the discount window approach as adding another layer of complexity.  We had to figure out how to get the resources from SOMA to the individual Reserve Banks in order to make the discount window loan.  But this was a very close call, and it really was an issue of zigging rather than zagging.  From an operational standpoint, we felt that SOMA was the better approach.  Trish, do you want to expand on that? MS. MOSSER. Not to be too technical here, but because this swap would be cash collateral, in that sense theres not a loan actually.  The institution would have to produce cash dollars and get cash yen, or whatever, on the other side.  If theyre in the middle of a distress situation, where do they get that cash?  Well, theyre probably going to be getting it from the discount window, honestly, or perhaps from the PDCF or somewhere else in order to execute this transaction. So if theres lending going on to an institution like this, it would be lending in dollars. We dont want to impose where the cash dollars come from, as a practical matter.  We dont know quite where their collateral might be.  It might be in the PDCF.  It might be in their bank. And it seemed, therefore, that to separate the liquidity swap part out from the lending part 
might actually have a few virtues. MR. SHEETS. On your third question about the announcement effects, we freely admit that there are uncertainties surrounding the nature of those announcement effects.  On the one hand, as you described, theres a possible adverse reaction.  On the other hand, at present its really no secret that major U.S. financial institutions are experiencing a range of stresses, so moves by the central banking community to further bulletproof liquidity in the global economy could be seen as a very positive thing. 
   But I grant that there is uncertainty. We dont know exactly how it would be received.  That is why we gave you this proposal A versus proposal B structure.  And if the Committee is concerned about the possibility of an adverse announcement effect or concerned that the announcement wouldnt have manageable effects, then maybe the best approach would be a delegation to the Subcommittee; the Subcommittee could establish these lines closer to a time when it looked like they were actually going to be drawn on. The other thought I have in response to your comments is, even though were likely talking about only a half a dozen institutions that have these sorts of vulnerabilities, if adverse circumstances arose, the implications could be very severe.  So I think it behooves us to think through the possibilities beforehand, and, as necessary, put in place mechanisms to address those sorts of vulnerabilities to the extent that we can. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Nathan, would you address an elementary question?  If we delegate the authority to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, why wouldnt that appear in the minutes, for example? MR. SHEETS. It would appear in the minutes.  But draft resolution B, which is the delegation to the Subcommittee, is not nearly as specific as draft resolution A.  This is just saying that the FOMC delegated to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee the capacity to negotiate these foreign currency swap linesit doesnt delineate the lines with the same degree of specificity that the other resolution does. In addition, its not saying that these lines are establishedits only saying that the Subcommittee has the capacity to establish them if it so chooses. So its not as specific, and our view, at least, is that it wouldnt be seen by the markets or by the world as indicating the same degree of urgency as an actual approval of the lines would. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions, and both of them have been answered indirectly through our give and take, but I wanted to make sure I was clear in my understanding of these issues.  Both President Hoenig and President Lacker have asked my first question, but Im going to ask it in a third way, just to make sure Im clear.  As were contemplating the extension of the TALF into these other, more narrow, categories, is it because there are critical problems in these markets?  Or is it also a supply issue? That is, we cant reach even the currently announced $200 billion if we are purchasing securities only in the categories that weve already announced. The second question is somewhat related, and, again, I think youve already answered this. Do we know who is purchasing the lower-rated tranches of the securities, and what price are they paying for them?  I know, Mr. Chairman, you said that the securitization market isnt even existent, but a lot of my contacts have been saying that it is important to the functioning of the ABS market to also get those lower-rated securities purchased and trading. MR. NELSON. Let me distinguish in my answer between those assets which we requested the Board to add this week and the completion of TALF 2.0.  For the assets that are being added this week, the objective is to fill out the ABS space, largely.  Thats the market that, in fact, shut down in the fourth quarter. MS. PIANALTO. So that means that there are both critical problems in that market and that, in order to get the dollar amount that were trying to put into that market, we need to expand the asset classes. MR. NELSON. These asset classes themselves are smaller than the ones that have already been approved, but they are, nevertheless, relatively large in size.  But it wont get us 
    meaningfully closer to the ceiling.  Its addressing a market.  Were addressing it at this point because the assets are quite similar to the ones that weve already added, so that we were able to review their risks and bring them on board quickly. MR. MADIGAN. President Pianalto, the reason for doing this is because those markets, like the other ABS markets are not functioning. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were not trying to fill up the bucket. MS. PIANALTO. If we wanted to take on less risk, we could stay in the one market.  There are enough of those securities. This is more about addressing the critical issues in those other markets. MR. NELSON. Yes, thats right. And, in fact, some of the sectors that were proposing for inclusion were harmed by the initial announcement because they are near substitutes to those things that we announced we were including. So it was very desirable to finish that phase.  I think that the answer is relatively similar in the next stageits just that theres much more review that needs to be done. Perhaps it will be done within a month, but it then moves to the larger space of markets that are also impaired but are similar in that they are the securitized, high-quality space of newly originated securities.  Im sorryyour other question? MS. PIANALTO. Is there any activity on the lower-rated paper?  We are taking the triple-A.  Is there any activity in the lower-rated securities? MR. NELSON. I dont exactly know.  In many cases, the lower-rated tranches are retained by the issuers, so that theyre able to issue the triple-A securities by retaining the lower 
rated. I dont have any specific information about other lower-rated tranches that have been issued in conjunction with, admittedly, just a handful of ABS that are being issued at this 
subscription, and who is purchasing those. 
    MS. PIANALTO. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions. The first one follows up on President Evanss earlier question.  Its one for Spence. I have been somewhat concerned about exit strategies. I think its probably going to be quite a while before we have to worry about it, but I think Id feel better about expanding some of these programs if we did have that worked out. When I read the balance sheet scenarios, I was comforted at first to see that its going to be a very long time before we need to deal with this at all.  But then I looked at it a little bit more carefully.  I thought maybe there was something in the scenario you laid out that was inconsistent, because it was based on the March Greenbook forecast, but that assumed no 
additional unconventional policies. Then, in your baseline you added $500 billion in purchases of MBS, which, in the staff memos on that program, has quite a bit of macro impact.  It seemed to me that, with the likely impact of a $500 billion program, we would have a stronger economy than in the baseline. We would probably want to be raising rates in 2012 rather than 2014.  I guess that would be about the same time that the TALF was building up and might be difficult to unwind. So my question is: Have I misunderstood that, or have I taken too sanguine a message from your scenario about exit strategies? My second question is for Bill, and it concerns the extension of the TALF from newly originated asset-backed securities to legacy assets.  As I recall, there were just a couple of paragraphs in the memo on that.  But it seems to me to be a very big step, and Im not sure I 
really understood it. Is this considered the PPIF program? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen, in just a few minutes I will brief on all of the developments in the Treasury program, including this and the PPIF, and the FDIC role. 
      MR. HILTON. Well, its a good observation.  The assumptions we took for the baseline were just purely the economic ones.  We did have an extension built into the outright purchase program in the baseline of $500 billion, as youve noted, but we did not try to calibrate a feedback effect, as you suggest, which would be a reasonable thing to do. That could move up a bit the period in which you might want to be otherwise raising the target rate. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Some of my questions are for David and Joe. Im looking at exhibit 3 again.  I think the overall analysis is beautiful, but this unconstrained policy with the negative nominal rates is not really a feasible outcome.  The truth is, you dont know what would happen, because its not feasible.  But then, to put that on here as where wed like to be in these pictures, I think, gives a little bit of a misleading idea about how we should think about these large-scale asset purchases.  Would it be possible to say, If I could pursue an optimal unconstrained policy just on asset purchases, heres how much Id do, and heres how Id let it unwind? Maybe that should be the baseline and we should skip the negative fed funds rate. Is that possible?  What would that look like? Would that get you all the way to the funds rate line, or throw that line out?  Or where would it take us? MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Its possible. Unfortunately, I havent run it, and Im kicking myself because we did talk about whether we ought to run it.  So I dont know what the answer is. I do know that if you had a $2 trillion program and you went by our assumptions, youd replicate the hypothetical and completely unattainable and maybe completely unrealistic 
unconstrained optimal policy line.  One question would be:  Whats the cost of buying all of these long-term securities?  Im not sure what that is.  This is part of the reason we hesitated on running this. But if you were completely unconstrained, youd probably buy everything you 
   could get your hands on in an attempt to drive long-term rates right to zero.  But presumably thered be some balance sheet costsIm not sure how to calibrate or describe exactly what those costs are. Presumably, thered be a shadow cost, so you wouldnt buy everything you could get your hands on. But the basic proposition that buy a lot would be a good thing to doyes, that would flow from that. MR. BULLARD. So we have a baseline, which is just to stick with our zero nominal interest rate, conventional stuff, and not do anything else, just let the economy play out.  Then we say, Well, we can improve on that with some asset purchases.  But we dont want to go too far, because you just get too far out of bounds.   MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Right. MR. GAGNON. One of the costs might be fiscal, in some sense. 
MR. BULLARD. The natural thing to ask is:  Why are there limits on this?  As Ive said before, theres the mystery of round numbers. Why $500 billion?  Why not $750 billion?  Why not $1.5 trillion? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think its the problem President Yellen raised, which is the exit strategy.  Is there a cost to exiting?  I think thats the main constraint.  Also, there are probably some costs associated with having banks holding enormous amounts of excess reserves. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think the staff decided that buying a trillion was feasible and buying $2 trillion may be feasible.  But at some point, its more of a question for you.  And what point is it just not feasible to go beyond, between the market problems you potentially create and the potential problems in setting up for exiting? I dont know what the limit is, but I think the gist of your question is: Whatever that limit is, would it make sense to go to it?  On this kind of analysis, the answer is yes, whatever that feasible limit is. 
  MR. BULLARD. Our job as policymakers is to somehow trade those off.  And I guess the model just doesnt help us with that. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. No. MR. PLOSSER. But the question is: Wouldnt it be useful to try to get some handle on it?  Suppose that limits not $2 trillion, suppose its $750 billion.  How do I think about what that number looks like, even within some ballpark?  I think it would just be very helpful for us to think about when those diminishing returns on the types of costs that the Chairman alluded to begin to kick in. And how do we think about that? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Ms. Mosser. 
MS. MOSSER. Theres a completely different set of limitations, namely, how much the payment and settlement system can handle, depending on how compressed we make these purchases. We have not done this yet for Treasuries, but for mortgage-backed securities, we think that if we tried to buy $1 to $2 trillion more this year, we would come close to breaking it. MR. BULLARD. Its great to know these kinds of constraints.  MS. MOSSER. Its possible theres a workaround for those sorts of things.  But if there is, wed have to start it tomorrow. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We could just acquire Fannie and Freddie directly.  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD. I cant give up the floor without tormenting Mr. Sheets.  In your report, and in some of the questions, weve talked about moral hazard problems.  Your response, which I thought was a good one, was that you were going to do the pricing in a way that made it 
a backstop facility, so that you gave the proper incentives to financial firms to stay out of this 
       facility unless it was absolutely necessary.  Is your sense that thats going on with the other swaps, especially in Europe?  Are we pushing them so that they are avoiding the same problem on the other side?  Or do you think we run the risk of becoming a permanent part of the market for dollar funding elsewhere in the world, just sort of a routine thing? MR. SHEETS. My sense is that the pricing of our dollar swap facilities globally, and particularly in Europe, is such that they had been attractive during times of stress.  But as the market has healed a little bit, theyre less attractive.  Let me just be really concrete here.  The outstandings to the ECB, as of early December, were about $314 billion under the swaps program.  At the end of last week, those outstandings were down to $168 billion.  So we have seen a sizableslightly less than 50 percentdrop in those outstandings.  Similarly, global swaps outstanding in early December were $582 billion, and at the end of last week they were at $330 billion. So I think were seeing the program and the pricing work the way that we want it to.  During those year-end pressures and with exceedingly high stress, this liquidity was very attractive. As the situation seems to ease a little bit, its not as attractive.  I know that a number of our counterparties have had auctions where theyve seen significant declines in participation.  Some that dont have unlimited lines have actually seen some of their auctions undersubscribed.  Heres another example of the decline on a much smaller swap line:  Australia was running about $27 billion outstanding in late November and is now below $10 billion.  So I think the pricing of these facilitiesand Trish may want to expand on thishas been done so that the incentives are the way we want them to be. MS. MOSSER. I think where the LIBOR rates are well inside, for example, one week and one month, those are the operations that are most undersubscribed and least used.  Theres 
  more in three-month, where the market rates are still more elevatedagain, this is reflecting credit risk and balance sheet constraints at institutions and how long theyre willing to lend to each other. I think the ultimate question is:  If things continue to improve, will the swaps ultimately wind all the way down to zero?  I think theres probably a risk that there would still be a few institutions that would like to continue to borrow, and well just have to take away the punch bowl when the time comes.  But, like Nathan, Im encouraged that, as rates come down, and in particular, as we basically get underbid by the market, the facility usage drops off pretty quickly.  So as long as that trend continues, I think were fine.  Whether, in the end, we have to take it away is a possibilityweve had those discussions with the other central banks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Speaking of facility usage[laughter]why dont we take a coffee break for about 15 minutes, and then we will recommence around 4:30.  Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The next item on the agenda is billed as a discussion of the balance sheet and lending program issues.  What Id like to do, with your indulgence, is to start off by posting you on a number of developments that pertain to these programs, and then make some comments on some policy issues, and then we can have an open discussion.  I just want to remind everyone, of course, that we have two full go-rounds subsequent to this discussion, so lets make this part of it more informal, and then everyone will have an opportunity, of course, in the go-rounds to give their views if they havent had a chance in the discussion. Let me begin with some postings.  First, a relatively minor point.  Its time to announce the amounts and schedules for the term auction facility for the second quarter.  Unless there are 
   objections, I propose to follow the recommendation of the staff and approve $150 billion per auction in April. That would be the same as weve had for some time now. The second thing I wanted to talk about is the accord discussions with the Treasury, which I have mentioned a few times.  I think that we are getting somewhat close to a possible agreement, and I want to update you on where thats going, and its going to be relevant to some of the other points I want to make.  The subject of the accord will be a potential conflict between the Feds role as a monetary authority and as a financial stability authority, the point being:  How do we define the role of the Fed in such a way as to minimize the conflicts between those two functions?  Currently what we have in mind is a short document that would havebesides an introduction stating the motivationfour key general points. The first point would be a positive statement of the need for TreasuryFederal Reserve co-equal cooperation during this financial crisis, so that is a positive good and something that we want to continue to do. The second point is that, although the Fed may provide liquidity in its role of pursuing financial stability, the Fed must be insulated from credit risk and must not undertake credit allocation, which the accord will state are within the province of the fiscal authorities.  What is meant by credit allocationand this relates to some of the discussion about the TALFis that, to the extent that the Federal Reserve gets involved in credit markets, we should try to do so in a broad way that addresses the macroeconomic situation as opposed to picking winners and losers within small categories of credit. The third of the four principles is the need to protect the Feds monetary stability function from the financial stability function, if you will.  In particular, the Fed and the Treasury have agreed on the need for sterilization tools that will allow the Fed to prevent any increases in its 
   balance sheet from affecting its ability to conduct normal monetary policy.  As Brian already said, we have developed legislative language, and I have promises from the Administration of the highest level of effort to go to the Congress immediatelytodayto try to get reactions, try to get some approval of either Fed bills or the SFP program, and that would be attached to legislation that is currently being contemplated.  Ill say more about that.  As Brian mentioned, I think we would prefer Fed bills, but we are putting both out there. The other thing that we are prepared to do, if we get resistance, and which I think a few people around the table might prefer, is to put a sunset on Fed bills or on this provision, so that its only for the current situation. The fourth element of the accord would be an agreement between us on the need for a comprehensive resolution regime for systemically critical nonbank financial institutions, which we do not have, and which I have called for and others have called fora way to wind down nonbanks in a safe and orderly way. In particular, we would want to say that a key element of any such regime would be a careful definition of what role would be expected of the central bank. We might have a rolewe might have a liquidity provision role, we might have other roles, depending on what the Congress wants to dobut it should be carefully defined.  As part of this, sort of aspirationally, the Treasury at this pointand well just have to see how the negotiation comes outwill state its intention that when it is able to do so it will remove from our balance sheet the Maiden Lanes and the other residuals from our various rescue operations. So I believe that these are the main elements that we need.  From my perspective, it preserves our ability to do what were doing now, which is to continue to support credit market functioning and to address the macroeconomic situation, even though the interest rate is at the zero bound. I realize it doesnt go as far as some perhaps might like, but I do think that it will be 
  an important step, a historic step, towards defining an appropriate line between our various functions. It should be clear that a principal reason that the Treasury is being so cooperative is that they would like us to support them in their bank rescue program.  So what Id like to do now is tell you where that is and whats going on there, and talk to you about what the Feds role, if any, would be in that. And I should say that we have not approved anything.  But they are looking for some kind of answer from us very quickly, and, therefore, this would be an opportunity for people to make comments. The original bank proposal of the Treasury had five elements, of which four have now been laid out to the public: the supervisory assessment, with the stress scenario; the equity instrumentthe mandatory convertible preferredthat would be given to banks that need it; the TALFthe joint TALFwhich, of course, is already, as of this week, in operation; and the foreclosure mitigation plan.  The last element, which has not yet been described and that we want to get to, is a publicprivate partnership for dealing with what they now call legacy assets.  I guess its like legacy systemsand the word legacy used to be a good word.  [Laughter] I have to say that I agree with the objective.  I supported the original TARP motivation, and a big part of that was to remove opaque and damaged assets from bank balance sheets.  I believe that is part of any successful bank cleanup program, because it will allow banks to attract private capital and give them balance sheet space to go back to normal lending.  So I do think thats an important element of the plan. Currently, this fifth element has, in turn, three parts.  This is very complicatedsorry.  The first part, which has nothing to do with the Fed, is an FDIC facility.  The purpose of the FDIC facility would be to take damaged portfolios directly off of the balance sheets of banks; 
   this would happen after the conclusion of our supervisory assessment, during the six-month period in which banks are supposed to be raising capital or otherwise taking action to stabilize themselves.  A bank would offer an asset pool, and a third-party valuation agent would estimate an expected price on the pool. Then, the supervisor and the bank would discuss implications for pro forma valuations and the stability of the bankcapital needs, and the like.  So there would be some preliminary discussion about whether or not the bank should actually engage in making this offer. If the bank decides to offer the asset pool, then the FDIC would dispose of it in the same way that it currently disposes of assets of failing banks:  It would have an auction, and the price that the bank receives for the pool would be determined by the winning bidder.  This is going to be highly leveraged, which is the reason that they hope to attract bidders who will pay more than fire-sale prices.  The leverage will come in two forms.  One is that there will be an 80/20 partnership between the U.S. government and the private participant, with 80 percent of the capital from the government.  And then, there is leverage provided by the FDIC, which is supported by FDIC guarantees, to attract funding.  An example of the leverage is that given a $19.5 billion portfolio, a private investor could have a 20 percent interest in it for $557 million obviously, this is a very highly leveraged position.  Why would banks want to do this?  Its not clear that they will, but there are some possible reasons. One is that we are looking in our supervisory assessment at embedded losses that go beyond one year, beyond the provisions.  So banks may make the determination that its in their interest to sell some portfolios, even if theyre in the accrual book.  Second is the proposition that, by selling off assets, a bank can make itself attractive to private equity and thereby, perhaps, avoid a capital injection from the U.S. government.  So thats the motivation.  Of course, typically, the sale of assets, if theyre marked down, would create a bigger capital 
  hole than initially, and so the U.S. government will have to stand ready to provide enough capital in case the private sector is not forthcoming. Thats the FDIC part of the plan.  It covers only portfolios sold directly by banks and possibly bank holding companies. The FDIC is not willing, or says it doesnt have the authority, to deal with assets that are not taken directly from banks.  The other two parts of the plan involve creating facilities to buy various classes of troubled or legacy assets, essentially from anybody in the market.  And the question is: How would they work? So thats where the Fed would be involved under the Treasurys proposal. Before I talk about them, let me just say one word about process.  The Fed has been a full participant in all of these discussions.  Weve done the lions share of the work on a number of these issues. And we have, in general, tried to resist the Treasurys strong demand for precipitant action, and tried to slow them down, and tried to make sure that we get this right, if at all possible. Weve also been very careful throughout this process in trying to ensure necessary protections for the Fedthats what the accord is about.  Another example is that we essentially vetoed a ring-fencing proposal, because we didnt like the way the Fed was involved in those types of operations. I should also say that I did have the opportunity to meet with the President on these issues; of course, we talked about a wide variety of things, but we spent about 20 minutes talking about the Feds role and our concerns and our issues, and he was very receptive.  In particular, he promised his full support for sterilization tools.  And Ill mention parenthetically that I have talked to him about inflation targets as well, and he said, That sounds really good.  Im sure his advisers will get to him before long[laughter]but he was interested in that. 
    Okay. So what are these two last parts of the plan? One part is publicprivate partnerships, which are basically hedge funds that have 80 percent government ownership and 20 percent private ownership. You could have the U.S. government in partnership with PIMCO, for example.  Those hedge funds will be able to buy assets essentially from anybody; there may be some restrictions on the type of asset, but not restrictions on whom they can buy them from.  There would be a 20/80 share in terms of returns, because the private sector is putting up 20 percent of the capital. The final part is TALF financingthat is, the Fed would allow these legacy assets to be financed in the TALF. Its a little hard to see at first, but if you look at it carefully, youll see that the combination of the publicprivate partnershipwhere the equity share gives shares in the assetswith the financing facility is really economically equivalent to the FDIC facility.  And what appears to be a differencethe put option in the TALF and the haircuts having to differ according to the asset riskis actually paralleled in the FDIC program, because there theyre going to have to set leverage according to asset class in more or less the same way.  So the combination of the two is essentially the same kind of thing, but it works for any type of asset. There are a number of issues.  One is certainly the viability and workability of the program.  I have to say that our initial reactions were negative, and we told the Treasury that.  Our concern was that it would be very, very difficult to deal with these very heterogeneous assets and to find haircuts that would work for each asset.  However, we have looked at it more carefully. A team that included Mike Gibson from the Board, and people from New York as well, has done what they called a proof of concept analysis to ask whether this could be made to work. They looked at some representative asset classes, and their conclusion is that it is 
  workable. But they think that, if were going to do this, it would be necessary to get outside contractors to recommend to us what the haircuts ought to be, what the risk profiles ought to be, and what capital we should require for safety.  In addition, they think we should have asset managers to take care of these things, so that we dont have to burden our staff further. The second issue is what it implies for the size of the Fed balance sheet.  We had previously discussed this when Secretary Geithner first put out the bank plan.  He announced, with our agreement, that the $200 billion TALF program could be expanded up toa very cautious set of wordsup to $1 trillion. At that time, we thought that the extra money would go into CMBS and RMBS.  The idea here is that we would not have a change in thatthat even if legacy assets are included, we would still be up to $1 trillion.  So, in that sense, we would not be changing the rules of the game. My own view is that we will not get to $1 trillion.  First of all, the Treasury is very short of capital. It has to fund not only the capital of the banks, but it also has to fund the FDIC program and the publicprivate funds, as well as the TALF.  So thats going to be a significant barrier to expansion. Then, I think that, practically, as weve seen, the process is just very difficult. It requires a lot of analysis, and what weve seen in the initial work on some of the simpler assets is that we may not get the demand that we thought.  And, in any case, its not going to happen for some months down the road. So there are implications for the balance sheet, but theyre not different from what they were prior to this. With respect to assurances, Ive already talked about the accord.  And, particularly with regard to the Fed bills work, we will maintain the no credit risk principle by insisting that we 
be fully protected if we do this.  Ill mention one other thing, which has not been explored, but which seems to me to be a very live possibility.  The senior debt obligations of the TALF would 
  be very safe assets, because they would be senior not only to the Fed and the Treasury, but also to the haircuts, so it seems possible to me that one other way to mitigate the effects of this on the Feds balance sheet would be to sell debt to the private sector to finance part of the TALF.  I should say that we had at least one presentation on this to the Board.  The Board has not taken a decision. We wanted to bring this up here and hear comments from the FOMC.  We are not fully persuaded that its workable and viable. In any case, were going to have to come to some conclusion pretty soon, because the Treasury is very eager to get going.  But we did want to bring this to you and tell you what was going on.  Ill be happy to answer questions about this in a moment. Before I give up the floor, though, I want to talk just a bit about the policy decision for this meeting.  The most likely direction that we would go, as suggested by the alternative statements, would be to increase our asset purchases.  Im concernedI dont want us to be making that decision in the last five minutes tomorrow when were trying to work on the statement.  So Id like to encourage at least some discussion of that today, because it fits in with the presentations that we heard. Although we dont have to make a final decision until tomorrow, at least Id like to know where people are, roughly speaking, on this topic. I will tell you what I think, because Im fairly open on the subject.  I do think that, as we will discuss, the economy has deteriorated.  Our balance sheet has shrunk over the last few 
months. Its true that well continue to buy MBS, but our TALF activities, even if we get into the legacy TALF, are not likely to scale up for some time.  So my own viewagain, I want to hear everybodys viewsis that at this meeting, we ought to approve an additional asset purchase. One possibility, which is probably the minimum we ought to do, would be to double the agency program from $500 billion MBS and $100 billion debt by midyear, to $1 trillion and 
     $200 billion by the end of the year. This would essentially do for the second six months what were doing for the first six months of 2009.  That certainly would be a possibility.  Let me just say that Im very interested to hear views.  We might want to go bigger than that, if we think that we want to be more aggressive. The other possibility, of course, as weve discussed, is also or alternatively to buy Treasury securities. People will express their views on that.  I think thats a potentially useful direction to go in, and Im very open to that, if thats what people want to do.  I think the U.K. example is promising.  It does show that there can be benefits not only to the Treasury market but also to the broader private markets.  And Im not that concerned about adverse implications, say, for inflation expectations, because weve all seen Treasury purchases in many other contexts; besides the British context, the Japanese have done a lot of this, the Swiss, the Canadians are going to start doing this. It would be potentially in conjunction with MBS purchases. So I think there are issues there, but Im open to this possibility. I want to say that I would like to hear some discussion today and in the go-round tomorrow, so that when we get to the final policy decision we wont be mamoment decision.  Well have a sense of where everybody is and what the best outcome might be. Let me stop there and open it up for general discussion or questions.  Lets try to maintain an informal format, and, remember, we have two go-rounds ahead of us.  Questions or comments? President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I have just a clarifying question.  When you say this stuff merges into the TALF, Im just not quite sure I understood how this would work.  Could you explain that again? 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Basically, what happens now is that an investor buys a security and leaves that security with the Fed and gets 90 percent financingor 10 to 1 leverageagainst that security.  Theres a put option, because its nonrecourse lending.  So it would be the same thing.  In this case, the publicprivate hedge fund80 percent Treasury, 20 percent private sectorwould purchase some RMBS, and it would finance that RMBSget leverage on that RMBSby depositing it at the TALF in the same way that an investor does currently.  The main difference is that the haircuts would have to adjust according to the risk characteristics of the assets. MR. PLOSSER. Okay. So we would have to set a new schedule of haircuts for these securities, because presumably they would be the much riskier and perhaps toxic assets of the banking system. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. And wed have to make sure we had sufficient capital from the Treasury.  I think that what might be going on is that these might happen in one-off deals where portfolios are being presented, and that would require us to hire investment banks or asset analysts to do the work for us and give us their assessments of the risk characteristics. MR. PLOSSER. Back to the accord issue for the momentyou talked about Maiden Lane going back to the Treasury at some point or under certain conditions.  Would these assets in the TALF be candidates for that same sort of transfer? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In one indirect senseif we find that we can no longer finance them because of monetary policy considerations, then, under the SFP model, Treasury financing would replace Fed financing.  But the difference between this and Maiden Lane is that Maiden Lane involves very long-term assets, and the TALF program is a three-year program, and presumably it would be winding down. 
     MR. PLOSSER. Okay. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-hander from President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Just to clarifythe legacy-asset aspect of this would be within the currently envisioned $1 trillion? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Within the current limits, yes.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. You said something that confused me.  You said we would be protected against risk because we would be senior to the Treasury.  Then you said and the haircuts? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I was talking about the possibility of getting private debt as a substitute for Fed financing in the TALF.  So thats a hypothetical possibility.  But, in general, the way the TALF works is that we have a haircut to protect us, and, if there are any further losses, then the Treasury is the first to take them. MR. LACKER. But the haircut and the Treasury capital arent two separate things, right? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, they are two separate things. 
MR. PLOSSER. But the Treasury capital is the same.  The ratio hasnt gone up for these assets relative to the TALF assets. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Weve got to figure out two parameters.  Probably the simplest thing would be to pick a single ratio of Treasury capital to leverage, because we dont want to do that asset by asset. So the haircuts will have to vary, and the combination of the haircut and the Treasury capital will protect the Fed against loss. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Or we could take the Treasury capital and apply it against all of the assets. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats what Im saying, yes. 
   MR. LACKER. So thats separate from the Treasury capital invested alongside the private sector in the partnerships? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats separate from it, yes.  Treasury capital comes in in two placesone to give leverage and the other to protect the Fed. MR. LACKER. Back to Maiden Lanewould that include the two ring-fence guarantees? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, this is aspirational.  Its not going to happen in the next six weeks. Its not going to happen in the current political atmosphere.  But it would be a stated intention of the Treasury that, at some point, they would be looking to take these things off our hands, and that would, in my mind, include those things as well.  MR. LACKER. I may be pressing you for things that havent been put on the table, but do you envision a public statement with all of these elements in it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, within a week or two. MR. LACKER. And would it lay out a timetable on any of this, or the transfer? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It will state that we are actively engaged on the Fed bills-SFP front. It will state the principle that the Fed is not to take credit risk, which we will enforce. It will state our intention, which is a strong intention on both sides, to undertake the 
negotiation on a resolution regime that will define what role the Fed might have in those kinds of contexts. And it will state the aspirational goal of the Treasury taking Maiden Lane off our balance sheet. MR. LACKER. Help me understand the statement about the Fed not taking credit risk, because we do, and its just a matter of degree. 
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, de minimis. Obviously, we take credit riskeven the CDS spreads on Treasuries are not zero. MR. LACKER. Would we have an understanding with the Treasury about what de minimis means? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill talked about it. In the case of the TALF, we have worked out criteria where very extremevery extremeloss outcomes do not touch the Fed, and probably dont even touch the Treasury; but they dont touch the Fed. MR. LACKER. Have we quantified that?  What is it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill, do you want to talk about that? 
MR. NELSON. In the risk analysis for TALF 2.1, we looked at a scenario which we considered to have a 1 percent probability. And even in those scenarios, all of the credit costs were covered by the risk spread itself, so not only the Fed but also the Treasury did not take any losses. Our objective is basically to follow that principle with the legacy TALF, I think the principle would be that under our stress scenario neither the Treasury nor the Fed would be 
expected to take losses. So losses, in order to come to the Fed, would first have to eat through the Treasury protection, which we dont expect to happen at all in the stress scenario. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Im trying to understand this.  The  TALF is for three years, and the way I see it, were taking the assets they put into this organization, which you expect to liquidate and recover at least enough to the point where were protected.  But how confident are you that we can roll this stuff off our balance sheet in three years?  These are distressed assets.  So we might have to turn them over later, or the market would have to change so much that you could sell 
   them, and whoever has the 20 percent risk would take any write-off.  I see us as taking the bad bank position in a good bankbad bank scenario. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were financing the bad banks.  We arent the capital in the bad bank. MR. HOENIG. As long as in the liquidation we dont go past the capital thats placed into it, right? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats right. But in terms of your other question, well have to be very careful about maturities, and so on.  For a three-year loan, when the three years are up, if the value of the asset has fallen by more than the haircut, they will put the asset to the bad bank, and the asset managers of the bad bank will sell it or dispose of it.  If the value of the asset has not fallen as much as the haircut, then there will be a strong incentive for the public private partnersand, of course, for the government, because the Treasury will be the dominant partnerto find other financing. MR. HOENIG. In your exploration of this, have you thought about the Congress setting up a good bankbad bank facility?  Are they resistant to that?  Or do we just think thats not a good option? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think the Administration is weighing the possibility of legislation to get additional authorities, for example, considering whether it would be possible to change the scoring on the TARP, which is very unfavorable.  If they can get appropriate authorities, I think they would do that. But the politics is just unbelievably bad, and its very difficult to get anything done. I think its their intention to try.  I think they believe that they may not have enough resources to do all they need to do, in which case they will pursue other 
resources, and we can see what happens. My own guess is that, one way or another, were 
    probably not going to end up taking very much stuff, either because there wont be that much interest, or because there will be other facilities, or because some other arrangement will develop. This is in order to have something thats part of the bigger program in the short term. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. FISHER. I didnt understand you there for a second.  When you say would not take much stuff, are you saying the bad bank would not take some of these assets? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I was just conjecturing that, in the end, this legacy TALF would probably not do very much business. MR. EVANS. Is that because of the pricing? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Because of the pricing and the difficulty of finding private sector participants. MR. EVANS. Its only a bad asset at a high price.  If the third-party assessment comes out at a reasonable price CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. So we have to mark it down to a market price which wed lend against, and then theres a haircut on top of that, of course.  So, the question is: Is that attractive? MR. FISHER. Can I come back to the Treasurys quid pro quo, particularly the third key element, the publicprivate partnership?  You mentioned that there was discussion within the Boardwhat are the concerns as the Board views it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The complexity is one issue:  Would we be able to figure out how to do haircuts in a way that would be meaningfulthat is, so that, on the one hand, the haircuts would be not so conservative as to imply no business, and, on the other hand, theyd be 
    conservative enough to provide enough safety? Another issue that we and the FOMC are considering more broadly is: What are the implications for our balance sheet, and management of our balance sheet? MR. FISHER. This may be for later discussion.  Maybe Im a little confused.  If I go back to our previous discussion and a comment that I think Mr. Nelson madedid you say that we were looking at this, the legacy assets into the TALF, as a way to take some bad assets off the balance sheets of banks? MR. NELSON. Is the legacy TALF a means to try to take the bad assets off bank balance sheets?  Yes, thats one of the objectives. MR. FISHER. Im a little confused.  Could you clarify that please? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The way it is now conceived, the FDIC would be responsible for taking portfolios directly from banks and probably bank holding companies.  So the answer to that question I guess is, no.  The intent would be to try to create more liquidity and pricing discovery, and so on, in these markets generally. MR. FISHER. So we would use the publicprivate hedge fund, as you described it, as a way to end up with some kind of pricing mechanism for legacy assets that trade on the market. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Correct. And I suppose if they wanted to buy from a bank, I dont think there would be any restriction on that.  But thats not the point of it. MR. FISHER. It just seems to me we are going throughthis is a comment, and it, again, may be based on ignorancea lot of jujitsu here to get around the issue of creating a good bankbad bank, taking the toxic assets in the bad bank and clearing it in that way.  The TALF is becoming inordinately complicated.  And I guess, if youll forgive a horrible pun, Im worried 
   TALF is getting too clever by HALF. [Laughter]  Were adding one segment on top of another, just as were beginning to figure out how this thing is going to work. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As I said, Im sure this will not be operational for months.  So thats one reason that I think that we cant wait for it in terms of our broader policy objectives. MR. FISHER. But you are talking about moving very quickly on this. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Its still going to be months, I am sure. MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, just a two-hander.  I was going to ask a question about the difference between the FDIC program and the TALF-related program.  How would I think about what type of assets would go to the FDIC program and which ones would come in to us through the hedge funds?  Based on the relative pricing of those two mechanisms and how they would work, which vehicle would attract what types of assets? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As I said, economically theyre very similar.  The FDIC, though, would deal directly with banks and could take a whole portfolioit could be a 
completely heterogeneous portfolioand there would be a bid on that portfolio, just the same way as when you wind down a failed bank. I would imagine that the remit for these hedge funds would be buy RMBS on the market.  I think it would be less heterogeneous than the portfolios that the FDIC would be taking.  The FDIC would be a much more classic bad bank type of structure. MR. LOCKHART. Would the design of the heterogeneous portfolios be up to the seller or up to the FDIC?  Theres a sort of RTC analogue here:  In the RTC period, assets were put together to make the package attractive enough to bid on, knowing there was some terrible stuff, but also some not-so-bad stuff in it.  Who is going to design those portfolios? 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If Im incorrect on anything, please, staff members, dont hesitate to correct me, but my understanding is that the supervisors and the bank together would determine the portfolio.  So in many cases there would presumably be a mixture of accrual and marked-to-market assets, a mixture of different kinds of assets, derivatives, and other things that are hard to break off but can be part of a portfolio.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. I just wanted to ask a few questions about the accord.  What kind of legal standing does an accord have?  Is this a gentlemans agreement, or what is it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, were one step ahead of the 1951 accord, which wasnt even written down. [Laughter] MR. BULLARD. Except in textbooks? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. To my knowledge, there is no document representing the 1951 accord. MR. BULLARD. Okay. So its a genuine agreement. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This would be an agreement signed by me and by the Treasury Secretary and approved also by the President and the Administration.  We would share it with congressional leaders as well. MR. BULLARD. The 51 case held for a long time because there were no attempts to change it subsequently, and thats the hope here as well, I guess.  But its really just an agreement between the Administration and the Fed for now.  Two of the provisions are really asks from the Congress.  Do I have that right? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. They are asks from the Congress.  The Treasury and the Fed agree they are needed and will cooperate in trying to get those things passed. MR. BULLARD. The Congress may or may not agree to them. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, thats always, of course, a risk. MR. BULLARD. So the accord in 51 was about how the Fed and the Treasury were actually going to interact. It did not involve this part about what were going to get the Congress to do or not do. Im just trying to understand what the object is. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For example, it will formalize the understanding that the Fed will take no credit risk in the TALF. MR. BULLARD.  Okay. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im happy to answer as many questions as people want to ask, but, again, I also hope to hear something about asset purchases before we close today.  Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. On asset purchases, [laughter] I think there are lots of good reasons to escalate:  The economy is weaker; financial conditions are tighter; in addition, the TALF is off to a slow start because of all of the stuff thats swirling around on AIG and TARP. The broader TALF, I think, is going to come much later.  While there might be an announcement on legacy TALF relatively soon, the actual operationalization of that, I think, is going to take many monthsjust given that the TALF 1.0, which were enacting today, took four months.  And the PPIFits not even clear whether banks are going to be willing to sell assets to the PPIF. Are they going to get a high enough price to engage in those transactions?  So it seems to me that right now its on us.  And its more on us than it was even a few weeks ago, because I think the political climate has deteriorated significantly, so the ability of the Administration to go back to the Congress and get more TARP money is significantly less than it was even a few weeks ago. 
  Then the question is: What should we escalate to?  The lines in Davids graph suggest that $2 trillion would put us roughly on top of the unconstrained line.  And, conveniently, the numbers I was going to advocate total $2 trillion, by coincidence rather than by design.  We did not talk beforehand, as David can attest.  [Laughter] I think that Id want to escalate the agency MBS program to more than $1 trillion, because escalating to $1 trillion through year-end is basically keeping the run rate exactly the same as the program is doing right now, which is essentially $500 billion every six months.  So I think we should escalate the program, and I would suggest $1 trillion. The market will not give us much credit for just extending the program another six months at the same purchase rate.  I think the market generally expects us to extend the program, so I dont think thats really going to have a lot of benefit. I would increase the agency debt from $100 billion to $200 billion, so Im at $2.2 trillion, to be honest. But Im not counting that.  I dont think the agency debt is really very important or that effective, but I think leaving it out raises more questions than its worth raising at this juncture. And I would engage in a Treasury purchase program.  The last time I was here, I argued mostly against it.  But I think the stakes are pretty high right now.  We dont know exactly how much a Treasury purchase program would do, but, if we start one, well be able to answer that question. Theres a lot of information that we really just dont have right now.  So I would suggest engaging in a Treasury purchase program, starting immediately, up to $500 billion, concentrating in 2-year to 10-year maturities and buying both nominals and TIPS.  We can also purchase things outside of those maturities to avoid distortions to the shape of the yield curve. But thats what I would do. One other thing before I give up the floorI just want to stress what the point of the reverse swaps is.  The point is to prevent some bad piece of news that creates a liquidity run in 
   some foreign market from putting us in a very difficult position in which a foreign central bank is unwilling to lend to a U.S.-owned company because it doesnt have enough collateral, and we dont have the ability to get them the money quickly enough to prevent a default.  I think that we want to do this. Im not sure whether we want to delegate it to the Subcommittee or actually 
enact it in the FOMC; but it would be really unfortunate if we didnt do this, and then something happened that caused the exact problem that this reverse swap will address, and then wed say, 
Why didnt we do what we could have done to avert it? So its a belt-and-suspenders approach, but I think were in an environment where we need both a belt and suspenders. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the asset purchases, my view is that the hole in aggregate demand is really quite large, and as I look at the figure on the gap between the optimal policy and the zero bound, I think its really stunning, so Im open to proposals for 
substantial purchases. In fact, Im not totally confident in any particular program that we have proposed, so I favor diversifying: Both MBS and Treasuries sounds like a pretty attractive option from my standpoint.  Im not quite sure how to evaluate the numbers that the Vice Chair 
just laid out. I know I cant disagree with him, but I dont quite know how to calibrate these other policy measures like in the Greenbook and Bluebook figure.  So Id like to hear more about that tomorrow, but Im open-minded. On the accord, it sounds good. The way weve talked about it is that its a long-term accord. Right now we have a lot of assets on our balance sheet that we would like to be able to get rid of. If issuing Fed bills is the way to go, that would be fine.  You mentioned that some might favor a sunset provision.  Would that be on the order of three or four years, or 20 years? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Five years, probably. 
   MR. EVANS. It sounds like its aimed at getting us out of the current situation, and I think thats a good idea. But over the next 30 years, our ability to have that authority might be a problem.  In reading your testimony on the 13(3) authority and the grilling that you got, I dont recall anybody who thought it was a great idea that the Fed had the authority to undertake this on their own, and they wouldnt admit that they knew that this was possible, at least according to what I had read. So I just wonder, would a future accord be a 13(3)-type of activity that causes us to acquire these assets, and then wed need to issue bills?  I guess Im just wondering under what circumstances we would issue bills. I think the lasting lesson from all of this is that we dont want to get here again, that we ought to conduct policy in a way to avoid this. Future regulatory changes that might help out are obviously one way, market discipline is another, and responding to large changes in asset prices that we dont understand very well might be another.  But keeping the average level of the fed funds rate at a place where we dont expect to hit the zero bound again might be much more attractive now, having gone through this, so that might be something we should talk about at some point.  If along the way you could get an explicit numerical price objective out of this, that would be quite good. And then, lastly, let me ask another question.  If the likely take-up on our TALF for the legacy assets is low, and given the prudent central bank lending that we are doing (at least according to the people I talk to in the marketplace; they dont find this very attractive), is the Treasury going to be satisfied with that?  How are we going to respond to them? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, my assumption is that they would move on to other strategies, which would involve perhaps the Congress, not us.  Which would be fine. MR. EVANS. That would be more desirable from a public policy standpoint.  Thanks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. 
  MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the swap lines, I do think that we could put in the minutes that its basically proceduralits symmetric with what other foreign central banks have done with us. I would argue for being transparent.  We need to be prepared for foreign funding problems, and I think it just makes sense to be clear on it. In terms of the resolution of holding companies, which ties into the foreign swap lines, I think thats as important an issue as the Fed bills, and I think trying to find a way to push resolution makes sense.  If you could argue that, if we had the resolution powers now we could be doing much more effective things with AIG, there may be a hook to actually move things along more quickly.  I dont know where our thinking is, but I see this as a chance to try to push that, particularly if it would give us an opportunity to abrogate contracts in the event that we or somebody else had resolution power.  But I think we should try to move that just as quickly as the Fed bills. In terms of the removal of problem assets, I agree thats a critical component.  I strongly agree that we shouldnt be doing ring-fencing institution by institution, so Im glad were moving away from that strategy.  I think the first-best solution would be more aggressive write-downs of assets, creating a bad bank for the most troubled banks.  I think its a much more straightforward solution, and I realize that it does mean much more capital for some banks because we will be taking aggressive action.  But I think that, just as we shouldnt have banks 
deferring losses, we, as the central bank and the Treasury, shouldnt defer losses if theyre really on the balance sheet. The first-best solution, I think, is to try to work with the bad bank solution. The TALF for problem legacy assetsI think we shouldnt make these programs particularly voluntary. If were going in and forcing write-downs, and the write-downs are fairly significant, the banks are going to want to participate in the program, because they will have 
  already taken the losses. So, instead of trying to make it voluntary, I think we should have the write-downs be severe enough that theyre going to want to get the assets off their balance sheets because theyve already taken the losses and theyre not trying to defer additional losses.  Thinking about how we can have a supervisory strategy that guarantees that outcome might make it much easier than hoping that people volunteer their portfolios.  To the extent that we can do that, that would be my preferred option. In terms of the policy, I think this is the time to be very aggressive.  I strongly prefer option A in the Bluebook, or possibly even a little bit larger, as Vice Chairman Dudley has suggestedId be open to that as well.  Were far from reaching either element of the dual 
mandate over the forecast horizon.  This is the time to push rates down.  We have a new program from Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae thats going to include refinancing.  The refinancing involves paying closing costs. Now is the time to push the rates down, so that the people who are refinancing and participate in that program only have to pay the closing costs one time.  It will also square us with some of the other issues in terms of encouraging servicers to come up with solutions. Its also springthe right time for the housing sector, and we do need the housing sector to start bottoming out, getting people back into the market.  If we push rates down significantly right now, I think many people will start coming off the sidelines, because even if 
they dont think prices have hit bottom, they will probably think interest rates are at an all-time low and they may want to take advantage of that.  So I think its a very good time to be doing that. I do have concerns that the TALF is off to a slow start.  When I talk to hedge funds, theyre quite skeptical about how successful that program is going to be.  Weve been kind of relying on that as possibly being a successful policy tool.  Because Im a little more skeptical 
 about either the TALF or the publicprivate fund working, it calls all the more for more aggressive policy, which is embedded in option A. So I think option A, which has both the Treasuries and the mortgage-backed securities, is the way to go. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. On the resolution authority, Board staff has been working on legislative language, and Governor Tarullo and others are reviewing it.  I think, frankly, that the Congress will be looking to the Fed and the Treasury to come up with the language, because its a very complex set of issues.  And we are working on it.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. I was just going to talk about asset purchases a little bit.  What Im concerned about is these one-off moves, and Ive been concerned about round numbers $1 trillion, $500 billion, and so on. I think all of the things that we do in interest rate targeting should also come in when were doing our asset-purchase program.  In interest rate targeting, as it has developed over the last 20 years, its all about the whole path of interest rates over a long horizon in the future. Thats all part of the policy:  How credible you are about letting the private sector know how youre going to behave and how youre going to react to things in the future. When we hit the zero bound, that all went out the window.  Now were taking one-time actions, with the private sector very uncertain about how were going to frame that in the future.  And we know that, no matter what model you have, thats not the right way to do policy.  So I think we want to get back to something like policy paths for asset purchases.  Even if we dont say it in our statements, the private sector is already imputing what they think thats going to be.  They just have bigger confidence bands around it than they would otherwise have.  So what I was going to talk about during the policy go-round is somehow to get to where you can announce continuations of purchases at some rate, or something like that.  My intuition is that 
   thats the right way to do these policies, instead of saying, Im going to come in with $500 billion to this particular market on this particular day, and I may or may not do any of this in the future. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is why I wanted to hear some of this today.  If you have a specific suggestion, you could bring it tomorrow.  But I would comment that we have been pretty clear about what the timeframe is.  Weve said $500 billion by midyear, and the proposal would be a trillion by the end of the year.  So we are effectively giving monthly rates. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But then, what happens after that is the problem. MR. BULLARD. Yes, what happens after that? And, I think, on the Treasury purchases, we have vacillated a little. I think as a Committee that we want the whole path out there for the policy tools. Also it might be good to indicate a little bit of contingency about buying at a certain pace; for example, were looking at the data as they come inif they come in a little stronger in the fall than we think, maybe well tamp down a little bit, that kind of thing.  Thats what Id also have in mind.  Otherwise, you commit all the way to the next year, or beyond next year, and it turns out something else happens that you didnt expect. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Taylor rule, and so on, emerged essentially from historical experience. It wasnt ever stated in advance.  So thats a problem:  We dont really have a reaction function out there, were sort of just starting the rational expectations process.  We need a way to think about that, and suggestions are welcome. MR. BULLARD. We should feed back the conditions.  We dont know what the rule looks like, I agree. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We could say something like, We will continue as long as, or something. 
    MR. BULLARD. Were going to monitor conditions.  Were going to buy at this pace. We give ourselves the option of buying at a slower pace if things come out better than expected, or something like that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I appreciate that, and suggestions are welcome.  Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me confine my remarks to the large-scale asset purchases. I must admit, I am quite uncomfortable with the idea of purchasing long-term Treasuries in size. As the papers described to us, the benefits could well be quite small.  My sense is the costs might not be.  This is an idea that weve been discussing for a few months, and as I think about the need that we all feel to escalate, my sense is it has gotten more attractive now because we have run out of some very good alternatives. Let me highlight some of these concerns.  First, I think the nature of the Treasury market is, frankly, quite different from the nature of the GSE markets that weve already entertained and I think Id be comfortable entertaining those more.  The long-term Treasury markets are functioning reasonably well; theyre highly liquid and the desire for risk-free assets is still quite high. My sense is, notwithstanding those facts, at this particular moment in time, Mr. Chairman, there are serious questions being raised by market participants and market commentators about the governments ability to fund new higher expected levels of Treasury issuancethat is, they may or may not, in the markets view, be able to find buyers at market-clearing prices.  Then if the Fed is perceived to be monetizing debt and serving as a buyer of last resort in the name of lowering risk-free rates, we could end up with higher rates and less credibility as a central bank.  My own sense is this could be self-defeating. 
   Very recent discussions that Nathan Sheets and I had with certain large non-U.S. buyers of Treasury securities confirmed these suspicions.  They note that at times like this we are one government, and if the Treasury and the Federal Reserve have to collude to somehow solve the issuance problem, it could be signaling greater problems about our ability to fund ourselves.  So I would say my concerns are particularly pronounced at a time like this. Now, of course, all central banks are struggling with arrangements between the fiscal authorities and the monetary authorities, as we are.  Theres no easy way around it.  I think the accord is certainly a step in the right direction.  But I fear that if we are perceived to be colluding with the Treasury around this idea, in the name of saving 25 or 30 or 40 basis points in the short term, were running serious risks.  Even if our actions lowered long-term risk-free rates for a time, and we got a popand I suspect we would get a popit does strike me the spillover benefits to lower rates on a broader range of securities are likely to be small, probably smaller than the models would suggest.  The availability of financing is unlikely to change by virtue of our actions. Our actions dont appear to me to change the universe of institutions or the universe of assets that are financeable, and credit markets would not open to anyone or anything new.  The best that could be said is that we are lowering rates on riskier securities by a very small fraction, and that amount is likely to be overwhelmed by daily moves in risk premiums, as has been evidenced in the last few days, with costs that, as I mentioned, could be quite large. With respect to the U.K. example, which has gotten quite a bit of attention overseas, I think theres a little less there than meets the eye.  My own sense is, this is more a story of liquidity, by virtue of the government entering markets that are considerably less liquid than Treasuries, and its also a bit of a story of a much more activist central bank in the U.K. than the markets had become accustomed to.  So I think thats probably playing some role as well. 
  In light of the choices we have, I think it would be preferable at this point to increase our emphasis on mortgage-backed securities, as has been described.  I think we could continue to argue that that is solving a very serious problem, which is that market functioning is still more impaired in that market than we think is ideal.  They are wards of the state, yet they are trading 
as very poor, imperfect substitutes for the Treasuries.  I think that would be a better option to take at this time.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  About asset purchases, I agree we should do more now. The monetary base has declined by $200 billion in the last couple of months.  That was unanticipated, at least on my part, and the outlook seems to have worsened.  So, if anything, we should be moving in the other direction. I have a concern Id like to discuss first about how we go about this.  We have these demand-driven credit programs that are having a big influence on the base.  Weve talked for two meetings now about different points of view about whether its credit programs and our asset side or whether its our liability side and the monetary base.  Weve talked about credit frictions, and weve talked about the demand for bank reserves.  I think if were honest with ourselves, we admit that we as a group dont have a clear viewwe havent decided between these two theories. Policy robustness suggests acting as if either could be true.  In this instance, the two dont conflict; they coincide. Both a focus on the base and a focus on the credit programs suggest we do more now because the economy has weakened in the last couple of months. What that perspective suggests to me is two things.  First, that in the materials we distribute before the meeting (this is something I have discussed with our secretary) its hard for me to evaluate alternatives that differ in the size of one program on our balance sheetthe  
  SOMAwithout having a sense of whats happening to the rest of our balance sheet.  Theres a substantial amount of uncertainty about the TALF, about the CPFF rolling off, and so on.  It would make more sense, at least to me, for us to evaluate alternatives in terms of where the base is going to be. And this perspective of thinking that the base matters is one that leads me to think that maybe we should specify policy in terms of the base. The second implication that it suggests to me is that we might want to direct the Desk to ensure that the base does at least somethingthat it at least achieves a certain level or that it doesnt go down in the intermeeting period.  We could set an objective and say, By the next meeting the base goes up by at least X.  Such a line in the directive wouldnt conflict with any credit programs, but it would direct the Desk to offset any unanticipated falls in the base due to a running off of the credit programs.  This is something Id like to see us consider and talk about tomorrow. More broadly, I like President Bullards ideaand I think thats the way we ought to think about thisthat weve got to vary what we plan to do with the base in response to economic conditions, as in a sort of a reaction function.  I think were kind of groping toward this. What the New York staff did in forecasting the base is a great start, but its a little hard to get a handle on such a large aggregate number so far ahead.  Im not looking for daily or weekly forecasts of the basethat would be a little overkill.  But something with a bit more granularity on the time scale might be useful.  I recognize theres a lot of uncertainty about what these other contributors to fluctuations in the base are going to do in the near term, and we ought to take that into account. But I think setting a floor for the path for the base in the near term has some usefulness to it. 
   About mortgage-backed securities versus Treasuries, I have a preference for Treasuries.  The reason is twofold. I was asking Ms. Mosser about flexibility, and I thought that maybe intervening in Treasuries would be a little more flexible than in agencies.  But, more broadly, I worry about the exit problem, and I worry about the optics of a situation in which, when the recovery begins, were holding a huge portion of the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities, and were contemplating selling it off in order to tighten monetary policy. I worry about what elected political officials will have to say about that and what pressure they might bring to bear on us to forestall selling off a big agency portfolio.  I think wed face much less pressure with regard to Treasuries, appealing as we would to the 1951 accord. About FX swaps, I have very mixed feelings for live institutions.  Im very concerned that the presence of it, which the banks would obviously come to be aware of, would diminish their incentive to inoculate themselves against the circumstances that would give rise to their need for it, despite the best efforts of our supervisory staff to ensure they pursue those inoculations. I think Case 3 is persuasive in conjunction with the closedown or windup of a large institution. So Im willing to reluctantly support it.  I think we ought to be transparent about it, as President Rosengren said. About an accord, what youve outlined is not my ideal accord.  I dont think that the credit-risk-free line youve sketched is a bright one.  I think that the price that were paying is pretty high in terms of using the TALF to fund what in early February was announced as something that would be funded by the FDIC. Bank rescues, I think, are worthwhile; buying toxic assets is very worthwhile. I think its very important that it gets done.  Something clean and simple and uncomplicated has much to recommend it, so I find myself supporting President Rosengren on this, for some straightforward program. 
    At the last meeting, we talked a lot about the TALF.  I wont rehearse the things I said then about it, but Ill note now that to some extent what were doing is recreating leverage.  I thought that theres at least a case that a lot of what went wrong in the last decade was excessive leverage. And if you think too-big-to-fail is a problem, its a problem because it leads to excessive leverage. We seem to be trying to restore the status quo ex ante conditions in credit markets by restoring the same extent of leverage, and Im not sure that thats the right philosophy. Im not sure that we can have a lot of confidence about the incentives of the private participants in the partnership.  Are their incentives going to be to price it cleanly or to overpay because they have the downside put to us?  Im not sure I see analytically how that works out. Id like to get rid of the ring fences very soon.  I think New York has executed theirs. We in Richmond have not executed ours.  If theres any chance of relieving us of having to execute that legal document, Id really appreciate it.  [Laughter] But Im not getting my hopes up, obviously. I take it that this would require congressional action to authorize the Treasury to take this?  About Fed bills, I agree with President Plosser that its something that would weaken our ability in the future to resist entreaties to provide funding for something that the Administration would rather not go to the Congress for. This is not a comment on our current political independence. Im confident that youve undertaken everything that we have discussed in making a full independent judgment about what was worthwhile for the Federal Reserve.  I just worry about future political leaders and the situation we could find ourselves in one day. About resolution techniques, it has always struck me that there are two things that get talked about there in one bundle:  One is technical legal provisions of conservatorship authority and the laws around resolving them, and the other is funding.  We have a model that works with 
  banks, and the funding of that is pretty transparent.  Id rather not get us involved in similar resolution funding for some other types of institutions.  Let me just point out that the original accord gave us independent control over our balance sheet, and Im not sure this really restores that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, let me give my comments on expanding our balance sheet by first saying that I agree with those who have said, and I think you have said, that we cannot get the economy going until we get the banking and intermediation process fixed.  And I think 
thats an important premise for going forward.  That means we need to focus on resolution, and I think this proposal thats being worked on using the TALF and using us to help finance a bad bank is actually going to delay dealing with this very serious problem.  Given the comments that President Rosengren and others have made, I think we have an opportunity to get this done with 
some legislation that would create the ability to put some of these holding companies in receivership and move forward, so that we can get the banking system fixed on a sustained basis. I think thats important, because I am very concerned about the TALF and growing our balance sheet, even at this meeting.  I think we should pause, because we have the TAF, we have other means to provide liquidity, should it be needed, and we have excess reserves that are sizable. I think we should focus on fixing the banking system and conserve our balance sheet carefully. I wouldnt want it necessarily to decline dramatically, but I dont think it would with the TAF, and so forth; we have the mechanisms to provide liquidity. But if the majority decides to go forward with it, then I do prefer mortgage-backeds to Treasuries. I disagree in a sense with President Lacker because I think it would just open us up to charges of monetizing Treasury debt.  And my experience is that it doesnt matter if youre 
      holding mortgage-backeds or Treasuries; when you try to sell them off your balance sheet, interest rates go upit doesnt matter; people are going to be upset.  So were better off with mortgage-backeds because it makes a cleaner line for us to say we are not in that business. I also want to talk about excess reserves and Fed bills.  I think that, as the banking industry itself has learned about excess reserves and the payment of interest, it is learning to arbitrage. From a governance point of view and from a simplicity point of view going forward, if the FOMC were made the party responsible for setting the interest rate on excess reserves, we would set the floor and control the fed funds rate.  You dont need Fed bills if, in fact, the banking industry has learned how to arbitrage it.  I agree with President Plossergetting us into issuing bills or in a so-called cooperative relationship with the Treasury, where were taking Treasury bills, is a very tenuous path for us to go down, and Id stay away from it.  I think paying interest on excess reserves would go a long ways to managing our balance sheet, or, I should say, our ability to control the fed funds rate. On the swaps, I understand where theyre coming from on that, and I take that pretty much as a given, but hopefully it will be carefully managed and not easily accessed by the institution that needs it. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. On the interest rate on excess reserves, I think its coming to play the same role as the discount rate.  If the FOMC set a target for the federal funds rate, that would essentially determine where the interest rate on excess reserves would be, analogous to the discount rate. I think that analogy will hold up pretty well in the future.  President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I want to comment on the additional asset purchases, principally. I fully agree with Governor Warshin fact, I think he understated the case, and that is that I dont think its advisable to purchase Treasuries here. Ive sent a note around about that. 
     For the record, I just want to repeat some of the arguments in there.  To my knowledge, there is no liquidity problem in the Treasury market.  There are no obvious signs of a breakdown in arbitrage across maturities, unless Trish tells us differently.  The spreads between high-grade private issues and Treasuries do indicate that the markets are not functioning normallyI take that for granted, and you can see it every daybut that doesnt mean that lowering long-term Treasury rates will affect private sector rates.  I do worry about the perceptionand its palpablethat we will be succumbing to political pressure to monetize the exploding borrowing needs of the Treasury. Trish, you gave us some numbers todayif I add them correctly for the fiscal year 2009, its around $2 trillion.  Its an inordinately large number.  Im preparing for a trip I am about to make to Asia, and I do think that theres a lot of sensitivity about this there.  (Im not sure if that is whom you were referring to in your reference, Governor Warsh.)  If we are viewed as the handmaiden of the Treasury here, I believe you might have a negative reaction, 
not a positive reaction. If the majority decides in favor of increased purchases, I support respecting President Hoenigs view.  I would prefer that we purchase GSE securitiesthe number is somewhat arbitrary, Bill, as you pointed out.  I would do it by size, or at least announce that we could go up to a size. The one thing I would caution against is giving a specific date, unless we are absolutely certain we can meet that date. I want to make a general point here.  There is a lack of confidence in the marketplace.  There was reference to that before; we see it with everybody we talk to.  Confidence is a function of competence, and I think we should exercise our muscle where we have proven ourselves quite 
competent.  We have proven ourselves quite competent, for example, in the commercial paper market, and we are proving ourselves quite competent in the mortgage-backed securities market.  Theres a question mark out there on the TALFwere not quite sure.  And its not because the 
   staff isnt making a great effortwere just going through this new process, and it has become enormously complicated.  I want to play to our comparative advantage.  No question we could buy TreasuriesI dont think thats the issuebut I disagree with that for other reasons.  But I would support an expanded program on mortgage-backed securities, because we are competent in performing in that area. On the issue of the swap lines, I agree with the comment that this is procedural.  I think we have to be very clear in expressing this. I do worry that it may become quite evident to some that were doing this for one particular institution, and I think you could have retribution in terms of price reaction vis--vis that institution and the rumors about others.  But as long as we keep that in mind and express it clearly, then, were I a voter, I would vote to proceed. On the issue of Fed bills and special Treasury issuance, initially I indicated that I would be against the issuance of Fed bills.  Im somewhat more enlightened now that the maturity that you described is in terms of one year or less.  I have been worried that a CDS market would develop around the Fed, which would be a negative development, particularly if there was a long maturity.  I still have doubts about the concept.  Im not as clear in my own mind, as President Hoenig just expressed, as to the alternative, but I do worry about the eventual assumption that we might grow that program rather than rein it back in.  Therefore, if we were to proceed with issuing Fed bills or an alternative, I would want to have a clear sense of provision.  Otherwise, I think the expectation would be that we would continue to expand the program, and, therefore, give rise to these doubts about the further purchase of Treasuries.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me just comment on three or maybe four issues. First, with regard to asset purchases, I dont have a conviction about the magnitudes, but 
   I would diversify the purchases by adding Treasuries.  I suspect that the preponderance of our purchases would still be mortgage-backed securities, but both because it puts us in a better position when it comes time to unwind and because it may turn out to be effective, I would certainly start to purchase long-term Treasuries.  Im not worriedI could be dead wrong about thisabout great concerns about collusion or funding exploding federal debt.  These are unusual and exigent circumstances.  People would understand what the intent of the program is, in my judgment. With regard to the TALFas initially described, I thought, and I think, it has some promise.  The way I saw it, you have some markets that are not workingthere are no prices.  One of the things we learned from the Japanese experience, the Depression of the 30s, and some other episodes is that you need to have resource reallocation occur.  Weve got to move resources from places where theyre no longer needed to where they are needed, and you cant 
have that happen without prices. So we need to get those markets restarted, and Im in favor of the TALF as described. I would stay away from legacy TALF; funding the bad bank is a close cousin to being the bad bank. Thats the job of the Congress and the Administration, and of course, theyre not going to be quick to pick that up if were willing to do it.  But it seems to me 
weve got to make a stand somewhere with regard to this, and this seems to me to be a very clear and direct place where we ought to do that. Finally, with regard to Fed bills or SFP, what troubles me about that is that from one perspective it could be viewed as circumventing the debt ceiling, and I dont think we want to put ourselves in that position. If we say to the Congress, Understand that this is one of the effects of passing this legislation, so that everything is on the table, then Im not troubled by it.  But if were not that transparent, then I would also stay away from that. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The legislation explicitly says it.  It makes no sense to have the SFP, in particular, if its subject to the debt ceiling, because then we would not be able to use it. MR. STERN. Okay. So long as thats understood. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few brief comments on the various issues. Starting with the swaps, I support the staff recommendation.  I think its a prudent step.  There were two possible draft resolutions.  I think I would favor the greater transparency of A, but I dont feel strongly about it and could support either. Then just a brief comment on the banking system.  I think its essential to fix the banking system for exactly the reason that President Hoenig and others emphasized.  I think we will not get recovery until we have a strong, healthy banking system with good banks that can attract capital. I would really love to see this done in the most transparent and straightforward way, namely, creating a good bankbad bank type of framework.  I agree fully with President Rosengrens commentsI would not make this a matter of optional sales of some portfolios of assets by banks that wanted to do it into a facility.  I would go in and much more aggressively, as he suggested, force write-downs on the value of these assets.  We have a great opportunity to do it after the stress test is over, and I would push these institutions into spinning off their 
operations, in the cases where it is needed, into a good bankbad bank structure.  If we had legislation that allowed for the resolution of systemically important financial firms that arent banks, that would be much easierto give us the power to push firms without necessarily having to put them into a conservatorship, but to take those steps.  So thats what I think would be ideal, and I think its important for economic recovery.  I understand its expensive, and I understand 
     its hard to go to the Congress to get the amount of capital thats needed.  I think the FDIC facility is a move in the right direction.  I prefer it to what were doing now.  Its not ideal, but I think its a step in the right direction. On the legacy TALF, I have issues similar to those that President Stern enunciated.  Im not dead set against it, but I do have qualms about our becoming involved in that business. On the purchase options, I certainly see the benefits of additional purchases of MBS, especially given that theres going to be a step-up in issuance over the next couple of months in connection with refinancing of mortgages.  The spreads are still high, although theyve come down, and it seems to me that the expansion of that program could have a beneficial effect on the housing market and the economy and on bringing long-term yields down more generally, since other long-term assets are substitutes for mortgage-backed securities.  I worry a little bit that theyre harder to unwind than Treasuries, but, still, its something that I would be very supportive of going ahead with now.  Bill mentioned a number much higher than I had envisioned. I dont know what the right number is, so Im quite open on that.  I would be supportive of going ahead with purchases of Treasuries at this point, as well, on various grounds.  One is that the economy is just a disaster area.  The economic outlook is utterly dreadful, and we have said we stand ready to do absolutely everything thats needed to support the economy.  We have let some time pass without doing anything, and in light of the outlook I would want to do everything we can. I thought the staff memos made a good case for the idea that the Treasuries and MBS purchases would have favorable macro effects, and I understand the concern about what are we doing monetizing the debt?  Thats quite a legitimate concern, but, on balance, I come out in the same place as President SternI dont think weve lost our independence, I think people realize these are unusual and exigent circumstances, and taking a step like that now 
  is a favorable thing for the economy.  So I am supportive of A and am very open-minded about magnitudes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me hit some of these subjects as well.  Were in a position where doing the right thing is not obvious.  Were in a second-, third-, or fourth-best situation, and I think weve got to make the best of what were doing, given all of the constraints. It puts us in a very difficult situation. I would include the swaps in that. I would be in favor of going ahead because I think we need to have this in our arsenal.  But I do worry about the announcement effect and whether, as several people have pointed out, markets will figure out this is really about one institution otherwise, why are we doing this now?  We dont have the situation we had when we put the other swaps into play, in which there was generalized pressure on the markets.  So I guess the head of your transparency subcommittee is for being a little less transparent.  [Laughter] I could go either way on it, but I would prefer alternative B in that case, just to downplay it a little more because of the announcement effects.  I think we need to put it into play either way. On the Fed bills and SFP, I wish I believed that the rate on excess reserves would work, but I dont, and I think weve seen evidence that it doesnt work. Banks are capital-constrained, and all of us are talking about further substantial increases in our balance sheet.  Some people are 
concerned about whether those increases in the balance sheet and, in effect, monetizing the debt, will have inflationary effects, and Im concerned that all of these assets end up being excess reserves in a banking system thats capital-constrained (and I know theres no risk weight on these reserves, but they are part of the leverage ratio).  I think having Fed bills or SFP will alleviate those concerns and will reduce some of the constraints on our actions now because it 
  will take the funding of those actions outside the banking system and will give us a clear framework for an exit when we need to exit.  So Im strongly in favor of pursuing those.  I recognize the political potential here, but I think in this situation, thats a lesser risk than the risk that we dont do everything that we should be doing because were worried about the exit. On legacy assets, I agree that a clean, simple program would be much better than these three complicated, interrelated things that are hard to explain.  You did a great job, Mr. Chairman, but its hard to understand how they relate to each other. I think were hung up on two issues. One is pricing the assets for a going concern.  This is unlike the S&Ls, where the RTC just got the assets because the S&Ls collapsed.  All the RTC had to do was worry about auctioning them into the market.  Now weve got to worry about the price at which were taking them from banks that are going concerns and, partly because we dont have a resolution regime, from bank holding companies that are going concerns.  So we really have no choicewe dont have a legal way of putting them out of business in a controlled kind of way. Related to that is the second issue, the amount of TARP capital available.  When we write these assets down, its going to leave huge holes in the balance sheets of some banks, and theres the TARP capital constraint. I wish neither of these were constraints, but they are.  So, I think, given those constraints, we should probably go ahead with the legacy TALF as long as the total TALF doesnt go over that $1 trillion mark. On asset purchases, I agree with the others who have said the economy is very weak.  This is a serious situation. Its not obvious that the TALF and these other indirect ways are having that big an effectI think theyll have some effect.  What we do know is that direct purchases of assets from the market have been very effective in the commercial paper area and in the MBS area. Where we do not fool around with all of the indirect SPVs, we can have an 
 effect, and we need to do that. Apologies to Bill Nelsonhes doing a great job.  But it would be much easier if we just bought the securities, even at market prices, rather than going through all of this circular financing. Particularly with the constraint on the funds rate at the zero bound, we need to use all of our tools, and asset purchases are the most effective tool we have right now, so I would definitely buy some more MBS.  Like President Yellen, Im not sure exactly what amount, but I would certainly at least continue at the current rate you were talking about, Mr. Chairman.   But I would buy Treasuries also. It really concerned me over the intermeeting period that there was this generalized tightening of financial conditions at a time when the economy was weak: Among the things that tightened was the risk-free rate, and corporate rates went up pari passu, more or less, with the risk-free rate.  Having seen Treasury rates rise while the economy was sinking was a very troublesome thing to me.  It felt like financial conditions were tightening at exactly the wrong time.  So I think we need to lean against that tendency in a very visible, transparent way.  I think buying longer-term Treasuries is the way to do that.  I think it will work in the sense of lowering interest rates. I think the table that Joe showed us was telling, where all of these announcements have had the expected effects on interest ratesits not basis point for basis point.  Like President Plosser, Im a little surprised that these announcements would have that effect, given that the markets are very, very liquid.  But thats what the data show.  Also, in every case the exchange rate moved in the expected direction.  So buying Treasury bonds would not only lower Treasury and corporate rates, but I think it also would take some of the pressure off the appreciation of the dollar, which has been part of the tightening of financial conditions.  I think the Treasury will issue securities across the maturity spectrum, because theyre concerned about their debt management over the long run.  So, in effect, I think by buying Treasury debt, 
  were financing the deficit with either reserves or Fed bills.  Were changing the relative supply of long- and short-term assets, and thats one of the limited tools we have when the federal funds rate is at the zero bound. I think we ought to be using that tool.  I think right now we need to make sure that fiscal policy is as effective as it can be.  So monetizing the debt to me is not a negative under the current situation, because its helping fiscal policy be effectiveprovided we can do it in the context of not having rising inflation expectations and not having concerns about our independence. I think these announcements havent had an adverse effect on peoples perceptions of our independence.  In the context of pursuing a framework for Fed bills and SFPso were actively thinking about the exit strategy at the same time were buying the bondsand in the context of our longer-term projections and strengthening what we say about inflation expectations, I think we can buy the bonds without concerns about raising inflation expectations.  The program will underline in a very visible way our expectation that interest rates are going to be low for a while. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Vice Chairman, did you have a two-hander? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just had a question about the liquidity of the Treasury market.  People have said a couple of times that the Treasury market is really liquid.  I dont really think its all that liquid.  Trish, did you have a comment? MS. MOSSER. Its more liquid than anything else.  [Laughter] But thats a pretty sad statement at this stage.  There are, in fact, huge price gaps between the different pieces of the Treasury curve. One of the things we do by going in is actually to improve liquidity, particularly at the long end, and hopefully help to bring down yields that way as well. It is interestingand this is a point I made in my presentationthat our presence in the mortgage-backed securities market, particularly the large presence in the TBA market, which is the forward liquid part of the 
     market, has improved liquidity tremendously, according to the asset managers weve been using.  I think our buying Treasuries would hopefully have some effect there, too. MR. FISHER. Can I ask a question about that, Mr. Chairman? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. The 10-year rate has sort of altered between 2.70 and 3.00 percent.  Is that correct? MS. MOSSER. Yes. 
MR. FISHER. And when we talk about buying Treasuries to bring rates down, give me an order of magnitude.  Are we talking about going back to 2.70? Are we talking about 2.50? Lets say we did something in size.  What would your expectations be, just so we have a reference point for this discussion? MS. MOSSER. It partly depends on where we would buy.  I dont want to get too technical here, but I think wed probably start not runswed probably start with the off-the-runs where we can improve liquidity.  Normally as the off-the-runs come down, part of that would be the spread to the on-the-runs that would come down as wellhopefully its low. We would move across the curve. I think the strategywhich were in the process of working out, because we werent so sure that we were going to be doing thiswould be to start there, but to go to recently issued securities, where theres a little bit of liquidity but not a lot.  In terms of the size of the effect, honestly, I dont think we have any better estimates than the ones that Joe gave you. Were guessing there would be a very large announcement effect, of the order of magnitude that Joe said.  Once we got goinglets say its $500 billion, and people figure out how much per week approximately we were going to dowed move back and forth across the 
   curve. We would announce in advance approximately over a course of weeks what tenors of the curve we would be buyingnot exact days and exact amounts, because we dont want to get front-run that badly, but wed want to give folks a sense of where we were going.  If we thought there were particular distortions in one part of the curve, we would focus more there.  So were doing something somewhat analogous to the way we are managing the MBS program:  We dont 
have an explicit target, but when both retail rates get high and mortgage spreads get high, the investment managers know to buy more, and we would take the same approach. MR. FISHER. But we would expect wed still have a positive-shaped yield curve, obviously. MS. MOSSER. Absolutely. 
MR. FISHER. It would still be fairly steep. 
MS. MOSSER. Absolutely. It would still be steep, but not as steep as it is now. MR. FISHER. If my memory is correct, it does help bankers to have a positive relationship. Thank you. MS. MOSSER. Yes, and its typical 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Id like to ask what you mean by improved liquidity in this context because we use that term a lot. Theres a market, there are some sales, theres a bid and theres 
an asked, theres a certain flow. We come in and we buy a lot.  That increases the volume.  Then afterwards, the price is presumably higher.  When you say liquidity is improved, do you mean theres increased the volume because we added volume by purchasing a bunch, or do you mean the bid-asked spreads are lower?  Or do you mean the price is higher? 
  MS. MOSSER. Bid-asked spreads, trade depth, how much size of a trade you could put through, how easy it is to hedge. MR. LACKER. So even apart from our volume, other peoples volume is higher. MS. MOSSER. Correct. We want other people to follow us in.  Our volume alone is not going to do it. Thats clear. If others dont follow us in, it wont work.  Whats interesting about the MBS market is that volumes were low, bid-askeds were very wide, and daily price volatility bounced all over the place. So if you actually wanted to sell any mortgages, it was very hard to figure out where they were going to price. What has happened since we have come in is that others have come in after us, because our managers add a little stabilityif the price gets too high, they buy a little more that day; they buy less if its a little low.  So they temper their purchases on a day-to-day basis.  I dont know if wed do it literally day to day for Treasuries, but we would do it over time. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Think about it as:  Volatility comes down, therefore the risk premiums will come down as a function of lower volatility.  And thats what brings rates down. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Pianalto. 
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the deterioration in the outlook, I do believe that aggressive policy action is needed.  I came to the meeting prepared to support alternative B, primarily because the simulations that the staff provided indicated that purchasing mortgage-backed securities gave us a bigger bang for our buck than the purchase of Treasury securities. However, I am willing to consider the purchase of Treasury securities.  I listened to Vice Chairman Dudleys comments about the fact that the TALF is slow to get up and running and that we dont have experience in the purchase of long-term Treasury securities.  So I do 
   support the expansion of the purchase of mortgage-backed securities and the increase in agency debt purchases, but I am also willing to be open-minded about the purchase of Treasury securities. Regarding the extension of the TALF, I am concerned that we are not being clear about our objectives. Some of the questions we had around the table today indicate that.  So I dont want our periodic announcement of additional classes of securities to be interpreted as if we are just being reactive.  I think that if we do move ahead with the expansion of the program, then making our objectives clearer will help the public understanding and help build confidence around the program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two sorts of questions Id like to address and tell you where I think I am and where I might be tomorrow or the next day after that.  The questions are, first of all, the expansion of the balance sheet. Should it be bigger than it is? Im not opposed to expanding the balance sheet.  Ive never expressed much opposition to it.  Whats not clear to me is whether we have the right set of metrics to help us judge how much expansion we need and what the right tradeoffs are as we do it.  In that regard, before I go any further, I want to thank the staff. Ive been raising some of these questions off and on.  The New York staff and the Board staff have presented an incredible set of memos for us this time, and I just want to thank them a lot for their efforts.  Theyre really working hard to try to address these questions, which are very challenging because they do not have easy answers.  Its much easier to ask them than it is answer them, and I appreciate that fact.  I do think, though, that we need some better metrics to think about what it means to expand the balance sheet.  Im very sympathetic to President Lackers view that maybe we ought to think about whats the size of the monetary base or the size of the balance sheet and set some bounds on it and how we think of 
  measuring that.  Improving on metrics in that regard would be very useful.  Also, in terms of the size of the balance sheet, thinking about why it ought to be bigger or smaller and what the appropriate magnitudes would be may help us think about what the composition of that balance sheet is going to look like. So I think we need to think about the size first of all. The second issue is, if we agree to increase the balance sheet to whatever size we want it to be, then we need to think about its composition.  Should the increase be in Treasuries? Should it be in mortgage-backed securities?  Should it be more TALF?  And here Im a little frustrated because I find myself, as Ive said before, worried about credit programs and fiscal policy issues and other things. But even stepping away from that, it seems to me that we do these various programs on almost a one-off basis.  I think one of the challenges we face is getting some grasp 
of how these programs are benefiting us at the margin.  Were always taught that you do things at the margin.  So you want to equate the marginal benefits of the different programs that were trying to be involved in, regardless of our debates on other points about them. One of the things that I think we should also think hard about is how the different programs interact with each other.  I raised the question last time, when we talked about 
extending them, whether maybe we could get rid of some of them, whether maybe theyre not doing what we thought they would do. How does the commercial paper program interact with the Treasurys guarantee program, which interacts with the AMLF, which interacts with the MMIFF?  In trying to get, as I think the Chairman said last time, some rationalization of these programs, Id ask where at the margin were trying to get some benefit from each of these and how do we equate them across that. I worry a little about the consequences of our pursuing programs where we become the lender of first resort rather than the lender of last resort.  One of the things we want is to have our 
   benefits spread across, or marginally equated across, programs.  But I worry about the consequences of our participation in some markets, where we either are the market or were making ourselves the market by what we do.  I think thats something that we have to be concerned about. We have to worry about the anticipation that other players wont be in the market, as long as were there.  Looking a bit beyond just the direct impact:  Are we discouraging participation?  Are we trying to revive markets that maybe shouldnt be revived?  Indeed, by trying to keep certain specific markets in place, are we impeding the marketplaces search for other credit-allocation or capital-raising mechanisms? So I think we have to worry about the endogeneity of the performance of these markets with respect to the decisions and plans we make. That brings me back to President Bullards point about having a plan and having a path.  I think its very important, and it interacts with this notion of the degree to which were creating problems for markets or solving problems in some of these markets.  Not knowing what our path of actions is going to be over the future, I think, is a source of uncertainty in the marketplace.  The way I think about it is by trying to get to answers for questions like: What do we think the size of our balance sheet ought to be or what should its path be? How do we equate the marginal benefits from each of these programs to achieving that growth, knowing full well that if we dont articulate what our strategy is and how were going to end when we enter markets, then we can actually increase uncertainty and volatility rather than reduce it?  We have to think about those 
choices. How does that play against the TALF and Treasury bills?  If were going to expand our balance sheetand, again, Im not convinced that we need to, but Im not necessarily opposed to itI do lean towards Treasury bills for a couple of reasons.  I worry about the knock-on effects 
  that I was just alluding to about TALF programs at the margin and the various other programs that we have. Im uncomfortable with not having more Treasuries on our balance sheet; I think Treasuries would help our exit strategy at the end of the day. My view of buying Treasuries, though, is really about the composition of our balance sheet and not about trying to drive down long-term Treasury rates.  Of course, in this environment, where its essentially a zero interest rate bound, buying short-term Treasuries is sort of a swap, and economic theory tells us thats not going to help us very much.  So we end up being forced into buying longer-term assets.  But my first concern is getting a better balance of Treasuries versus all this other stuff on our balance sheet. So Id be inclined in favor of buying Treasuries.  It doesnt mean Id be opposed to buying more MBS at some point in the future, but we havent gotten to the $500 billion level yet, and we havent articulated a path.  So Id wait until we got a plan together to articulate this path before we announced additional purchases of those types of assets. Like President Stern, Im not a big fan of doing the legacy ABS through the TALF.  Ill treat the bad bank model separately.  But expanding the TALF to legacy stuff is going a little too far. Again, I worry about us becoming the lender of first resort, and Im just not sure thats 
where we want to be. On the bad bank/good bankPresident Stern made this pointIm not sure that ought to be our business or that we ought to be funding it.  I think that should be a Treasury issue, and if we can avoid being in that business, I would prefer it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were not funding the bad bank. MR. PLOSSER. But were taking on the assets in support and providing the liquidity through the TALF to do that. Id rather let the FDIC program work than have us augment it. 
   But let me move on to the other two issues.  On the resolution mechanism, Mr. Chairman, I think youve been very clear about it; in fact, people in this room, myself included, have been talking about this for almost a year.  We need to get on with that, and its very critical.  I think thats going to help us a lot, so I support that effort. As to the accord, I shared a memo about it with the Committee.  My views there are pretty clear. They really havent changed.  I do think that its important that the accord as I proposed it be about keeping our balance sheet much more pristine and about the exit.  It had its antecedents in Al Broadduss and Marvin Goodfriends work and even was a recommendation of the financial stability group of the G30. But I do think that its a form of constrained discretion.  If we dont want to be in the business of doing fiscal policy and we want to discourage the Congress from coming to us to engage in fiscal policy, then we want to make it easier for us to say no in those circumstances.  I think, Mr. Chairman, youve done a terrific job in this; in the example of the Congress talking about funding the automobile companies, you were very clear that that was not our business.  We want to discourage those kinds of requests, and my concern is raising the threshold for saying yes. What worries me about the Fed bills option, as opposed to the supplemental financing securities, is that the Fed bills option is going to make it easier for them to ask us to do things.  I think of it as giving us an almost incredibly unconstrained discretion to do fiscal policy or to be asked to do fiscal policy. And that may ultimately become a lack of independence, not a source of independence. That worries me, because, at some point down the roadmaybe ten years, 
fifteen years, whateverif the Federal Reserve became more politicized than it has been in the 
past, it might be much more susceptible or much more responsive to a claim that we have to coordinate monetary and fiscal policies, and therefore, Federal Reserve, you should issue some 
  Treasury bills on our behalf and do some things to help coordinate policies.  That probability may not be large, but it would be a very bad outcome for the institution, and I think we should do all we can to resist being in that spot.  The sunset provision, Mr. Chairman, as you suggested, may provide us some protection against that, but if the sunset provision comes along and weve issued Fed bills in the past, then it might be easy for them to want us to do it again.  So my current feeling is, if I cannot get a true accord, as I advocated in my memo, Id prefer the supplemental financing program to be conducted as needed.  If we think we need that 
sterilization capability, Id rather go that route.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The time is late, and in the interest of time and in response to the body language I see around the room, Im going to limit myself to talking about the asset-purchase question.  I came here favoring growing the balance sheet with more asset purchases principally because of the deteriorating outlook.  A lot of good arguments have been made on both sides, whether it be Treasuries or an MBS program.  I, on balance, favor the MBS approach for reasons a number of you have articulated, particularly Governor Warsh.  But I would like to focus my remarks on a dimension that has been touched on, but perhaps not explicitly addressed, and thats the communications challenges.  In lots of conversations over the last few weeks, particularly with directors and so forth, I get the increasing sense that we have big communication challenges, and they are part of the problem.  Theres a lot of confusion and uncertainty regarding how were making our decisions, what comes next, and how it all fits together as a total policy set. I think we need to consider favoring programs that are already in place.  Simplicity, I think, counts in these circumstances.  I would argue that it may be better to err on the side of no 
   new stuff if we can, to be as concrete as we can, to try to explain the decision framework that we are using, and to try to repeat a holistic explanation of policy going forward.  So I think a consideration in the decision is the question of communication.  President Fisher used the term confidence. President Bullard talked about path.  President Plosser used the word uncertainty. This all comes together to me as one more element to take into consideration, which is: How do we communicate it clearly, so the public, particularly the business public, understands? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For those who have talked about rates, would expressing purchases in terms of monthly rates be of any help?  I havent yet heard a specific suggestion about how to do that. Something like, say, the Desk will aim to buy $80 billion a month of mortgage-backed securities. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Youd want it conditional on the financial conditions.  In other words, if things got worse, youd want to accelerate the rate, and similarly, if things got better. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im looking for a concrete example.  Id be more than happy to try to accommodate this kind of language if we can figure out how to do it.  Brian is already worried about missing dinner, Im sure.  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Hes worried about missing going to bed today.  [Laughter] MR. LOCKHART. Let me think about the question overnight, and Ill come back with an answer tomorrow. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, good. Well discuss that in the morning.  Governor Tarullo. 
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mindful of the fact that Im now the major impediment between the Federal Open Market Committee and dinner, I will follow President Lockharts lead and confine myself to comments on the large-scale asset-purchase issue.  But could I ask Trish a couple of quick questions beforehand?  One, Trish, you said earlier something about the equivalent of absorption capacity, or I guess its actually going in the other direction, the effective limit on MBS purchases. MS. MOSSER. And the number wasthis is our best guessan additional $2 trillion of mortgage-backed securities, that might strain it. MR. TARULLO. Okay. Second, you were working with the half trillion figure for government securities, which had been put in the Bluebook.  Is there a minimum figure below which a palpable impact wouldnt be felt? MS. MOSSER. Thats a very hard question to answer.  I am concerned that a very small quantity would be seen as ineffective, and part of this is about the announcement effect, not to mention the liquidity effect.  Could it be less than $500 billion? Yes.  We calculated about how much we would have to buy every week, and wed go in two or three times a week with several billion dollars every time.  So these would be sizable transactions from our perspective.  It could be scaled back a bit, but I wouldnt want to put it at $100 billion or $200 billion, not over a nine-month period. Im afraid it wouldnt be effective. MR. TARULLO. Okay. Thanks. So, somewhat informed by those helpful answers, here are my views as they now stand.  First, it seems to me that under current circumstances, for the reasons many of you have stated, the risks for us are in doing too little, not in doing too much.  That leads me to the predisposition towards a large figure, at least as large as the Option A total 
that was included in the Bluebook, and, as Vice Chairman Dudley has suggested, perhaps larger 
  than that as well. Second, it seems to me with respect to the issue of the proper numberhow do we know where we are going, how do we know how much is enoughyou all have for some time been, and now Im joining you, navigating in waters in which theres not a particularly good map to follow, so its necessarily a matter of making judgments based upon what appear to be still seriously dysfunctional credit markets and a serious absence of liquidity and a seriously underperforming real economy.  In those circumstances, I feel pushed towards the larger end of 
the ranges that have been identified as appropriate.  Third, for the reason that President Evans stated earlier in the afternoon, my inclination is towards multiple instruments.  Ive been struck just in my first six weeks here how many times people have commented that correlations or predictions that people might have expected in normal times are now breaking down a bit.  Were not entirely sure of the effects of the application of a particular policy instrument, and it seems to me that, under those circumstances, it would be wise to mix instruments that are essentially directed towards the same end.  Having said that, my instinct, if it is possibleand this is why I asked Trish the question about minimum purchases of government securitiesis for an asymmetric number and an asymmetric emphasis upon the MBS rather than the Treasury securities. Here Id echoor stealsome of the points that Vice Chairman Dudley made a moment ago. Finally, on communications, I have a slightly different, but I think complementary, point to the one that President Lockhart made:  If we go this route of including both MBS and Treasuries, I hope we could at least consider giving some explanation in the Committees statement about why were pursuing both rather than simply stating here is the amount of each which weve instructed the Desk to purchase.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Governor Duke. 
  MS. DUKE.  Now Im the one standing in the way of dinner.  I just want to talk a bit about expansion of the TALF and then also about asset purchases.  In terms of expanding the TALF, my concern is about some of the asset classes, for instance, commercial-mortgage-backed securities. I dont know a lot about how those are put together, but I do know a lot about commercial mortgages, and theyre much closer to business loans than they are to real estate loans. Theyre entirely dependent on cash flows of different types of businesses.  So if we get into those kinds of purchases and we start to determine the haircuts, were going to be looking at credit allocation, because were going to be looking at differences in conditions in different industries and the real estate that supports those industries. The second thing is that I dont think you can make a bad asset into a good one by taking a larger haircut. If were going to be taking assets not from banks, but from anybody who wants to disgorge them, then what would keep us from simply moving assets from one hedge fund to another? And I really get concerned that the Fed ends up getting stuck trying to digest every hairball thats out there in the marketplace.  [Laughter]  Thats a technical term, hairball. I also worry that when we originally talked about expanding the TALF up to $1 trillion, it was with the understanding that that was conditional upon our getting the ability to issue either Fed bills or the supplemental Treasury securities.  That has gotten lost in the discussion of it, and I worry that with a quick announcement on this other facility, the notion would again get lost, namely, that its dependent upon other things happening. Finally, I dont see this as a good bankbad bank situation, and I worry whether wed have enough left to deal with emergencies if they came up.  Ill talk more about this tomorrow, but the more I keep going around and around considering all the things were trying to do to fix the banking systemwhile I think its importantIm not nearly as confident as everyone else 
 that its something that we can do. So I keep coming back to thinking that the only thing we can do is to put a floor under house prices.  If we could put a floor under house prices, that would also put a floor under bank losses, and I think its our best chance to get moving in the right direction. Before I move to asset purchases, Id like to start with the story of an elderly wealthy gentleman who had taken a young bride and begun to spend money like crazy.  His friends got very concerned that he was going to go through his entire fortune, and they elected one of their number to go and talk to him about it.  He said, Sam, were really concerned.  We want to make sure that you know that you cant buy love. Sam said, I know you cant buy love, but if you spend enough money, you can buy something that looks so close you can hardly tell the difference. [Laughter] So I think if we spent enough money, got enough of a hit right now, it would look like a floor on house prices, and we might have something every bit as good as a floor on house prices. It seems like the best time, when we have the synergies with the housing program, which should reduce foreclosures and should increase the ability to refinance.  Both borrowers and purchasers are so incredibly hair-trigger sensitive to what goes on with mortgage interest rates. Mortgage interest rates went down when we made the announcement before, but that was in November, and that was not the season when people buy houses.  If we do this in the 
spring, when there are other programs that would support it and when its pretty obvious that theres not going to be any fiscal stimulus coming along that would also further support house purchases, then maybe weve got a window of opportunity where we can go in there and put a floor under house prices, and that will start to move some of these other things.  And with that, Mr. Chairman, I believe Im the last one. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, Im certainly glad we avoided a go-round.  [Laughter] Before we leave, we have a little bit of business.  We have to ratify domestic open market operations. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. Thank you. We do have to vote on the temporary liquidity swap lines.  I heard most people proposing A, which was the more 
transparent alternative, understanding that there were perhaps some risks to that.  Governor Kohn, are you okay with that? MR. KOHN. Sure. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Would anyone else like to speak on that question? (No response.) If not, do you want to take the roll on the swap lines? MS. DANKER. Okay. On resolution A from the memo. 
Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes Governor Kohn  Yes President Lacker  Yes President Lockhart  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes President Yellen   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you very much.  At dinner tonight well celebrate Governor Kroszners return, and well begin tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you very much. [Meeting recessed] 
        March 18, 2009Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I guess were ready now, finally, for the economic review.  Let me turn it over to Dave Stockton. MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In looking at the myriad ways in which we were surprised by the incoming data and forced by evolving economic and financial circumstances to revise our forecast, I began to think that maybe my wife was on to something when she recently gave me a T-shirt that reads Mind of an Athlete  Body of a Genius. [Laughter] Well, as you know from reading the Greenbook, we did mark down substantially our forecast this round.  We are now projecting that real GDP will fall 2 percent this year and increase just 1 percent next year; those are downward revisions of about 1 and 1 percentage point, respectively, from our January projection.  Given that weaker outlook for activity, we expect that the unemployment rate will rise to 9 percent in early 2010, where it will remain through the end of the year. Three principal factors were behind the sizable downward revision that we made to our forecast: first, much weaker foreign activity and a stronger exchange value of the dollar; second, weaker incoming data on employment, production, and spending 
for the domestic economy; and third, at least as of last Wednesday, a drop in the stock market of about 15 percent relative to our January forecast. Steve will have more to say about the foreign outlook, but in sum, the projected deterioration in foreign activity and the higher value of the dollar account for about one-third of the downward revision that we have made to our forecast of GDP.  But the incoming data on the domestic economy have been dismal as well.  Starting with 
the labor market, private payrolls have been dropping at an average monthly pace of 650,000 since November, surprising us to the downside.  Indeed, the level of payroll employment in February was 550,000 lower than was anticipated in our January forecast. And since the February reference week, initial claims have moved up further, as has the level of insured unemployment, suggesting that job losses likely remained appreciable this month.  The household survey has shown a similar deterioration. The unemployment rate rose to 8.1 percent in February, nearly  percentage point above the level that we expected in our previous forecast. Measures of manufacturing production also point to a steep contraction in activity. After falling at a 17 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, further widespread declines in factory output in January and February put us on track for an even steeper drop in the current quarter. Moreover, national and regional purchasing managers indexes suggest that declines will continue in the coming months.  Plummeting output left the capacity utilization rate in the manufacturing sector at about 67 percent in February, its lowest level since we began publishing that series in 1948. 
        As you know, the motor vehicle sector has been especially hard-hit.  In response to the steady weakening of demand over the past year, automakers have slashed production. Assemblies of light vehicles fell to a 3.7 million unit pace in January, the lowest level since the 1950s, and that includes months in which there have been UAW strikes. Production increased to a still meager 4 million unit pace in 
February, and we expect a further increase to about 5 million units in March.  But 
for the current quarter as a whole, the average level of production is low enough to lop 2 percentage points off the change in real GDP. We have motor vehicle sales bottoming out in the next couple of months at levels just a bit below those seen in February. If that occurs, some further modest increase in production seems likely, as inventories will have been brought into substantially better alignment with sales.  That said, production in the second quarter is only expected to move up to what we previously would have considered a deep recession level of 5 million units.   In addition to significant downside surprises in the labor market and in industrial production, the incoming spending data have been much weaker than we had expected seven weeks ago. Starting with some ancient history, we lowered our estimate of fourth-quarter real GDP by 2 percentage points to show a decline of 6 percent at an annual rate, with much weaker final sales more than accounting for the downward revision. Moreover, the incoming data early this year have led us to revise down our estimate of output for the first quarter as well.  Indeed, the ink had barely dried on the Greenbook when we received weaker-than-expected trade data 
last Friday. Taking on board those data, we would probably mark down a bit further our projected decline in real GDP closer to minus 7 percent, about 1 percentage points below our January forecast. Aside from net exports, some of the biggest negative surprises have been in capital spending, which is contracting more sharply than we had expected.  Business fixed investment fell at an annual rate of 22 percent in the fourth quarter and is projected to drop at a 25 percent pace this quarter.  Large cutbacks are being made in outlays for both equipment and structures. The pullback in capital spending has been greater than can be explained by business sales and interest rates alone, suggesting that financing constraints and heightened economic uncertainty are part of the story. Spending by state and local governments has fallen noticeably as well; we had been expecting these governments to hold outlays roughly steady while waiting for 
greater clarity on potential relief from the federal government.  Instead, mounting budget pressures led these entities to cut employment and spending late last year and early this year.  We still think fiscal stimulus will provide a boost to state and local spending, but from a lower underlying base than we had expected in January. The one notable positive innovation has come from retail sales, which posted increases in both January and February.  Given the stronger recent numbers and the imminent support from fiscal stimulus, we now expect some stabilization in consumer 
           spending in the near term, rather than the declines we had projected in the last forecast. Still, with mounting job losses, deteriorating household balance sheets, and sour sentiment, we dont think a sustained upturn in consumer spending will occur until late this year. All told, the large downward revisions we have made to employment, production, and sales in the near term have important implications for the dynamics of the 
forecast going forward.  The weaker labor market implies lower incomes and lower 
consumer outlays.  And with the stock market down from our previous projection, those multiplier consequences for spending are amplified by more negative wealth 
effects. The accompanying weaker spending and business sales, in turn, feed back 
into lower capital outlays through the accelerator effect. Another key element in the downward revision that we made to our forecast was housing. It has seemed, no matter how low we set the forecast, the data surprise us to the downside. Sales, starts, and permits all fell more than we expected in January, and we revised down the projected trajectory of housing starts significantly over the forecast period. As for the timing of when we expect to reach the bottom in starts, with a dogged persistence that is beginning to resemble that of Chicago Cubs fans, our motto remains, Wait until next quarter.  Yesterdays data on housing starts for February provide a glimmer of hope.  Both starts and permits moved up, rather than declining as we had expected. But just as a few wins in spring training dont portend a World Series, it would be premature to read the starts figures for February as suggesting that we have reached a bottom in this sector. The deeper declines that have occurred in final sales have left firms facing a larger inventory problem than we had earlier thought.  In addition to the overhangs of unsold houses and motor vehicles that have been with us for some time, inventory-sales ratios now appear elevated in a wide range of industries.  As a consequence, the production adjustment in our current forecast is larger and more protracted than the one incorporated in the January Greenbook. While our projected recession is deeper and longer than in our previous forecast, we do see a variety of forces capable of braking the decline in activity and promoting an eventual recovery.  For one, the most negative multiplier-accelerator effects 
associated with last years shock are expected to fade out over the course of this year.  Moreover, fiscal stimulus should provide a sizable boost to demand and production in coming months. And, we expect financial conditions to gradually improve over the balance of this year and in 2010, with the stock market turning up, bond spreads narrowing, and credit restrictions easing. This broad improvement in financial conditions is an important element in our projected recovery.  On this point, we take some limited 
comfort from the lack of further deterioration in recent months in some of our summary measures of financial stressindicators that we have used to help gauge the unusual restraint on spending created by the disruptions in financial markets.  All 
                                                   4 A table distributed by Mr. Stockton is appended to this document (appendix 4).             told, an anemic recovery gets under way in 2010 and then gathers further momentum in 2011 and beyond. One notable feature of our forecast is that we have a downturn that in magnitude equals or exceeds those of 1970s and 1980s, but is followed by a recovery that looks like the gradual ones of the early 1990s and early 2000s.  We think this makes sense for several reasons. First, the deterioration in household wealth has been enormous, and even with our projected increase in the stock market, the wealth-to-income ratio remains much 
lower than it has been for the past 20 years.  The adjustment of household spending to that reduction in wealth seems likely to occur slowly, holding down spending for some time.  Second, and perhaps more speculatively, we dont think sizable pent-up demand is developing in either the household or business sector.  Admittedly, it is awfully difficult to estimate target capital stocks for either sector, but our rough estimates suggest that we should not expect a big boost from efforts to rebuild depressed capital stocks. Third, conventional monetary policy actions have been exhausted, and we did not assume any additional nonconventional actions in this 
forecast. Nor have we assumed any additional fiscal stimulus.  And finally, as we noted in the January chart show, we read the evidence as suggesting that recoveries from financial crises tend to be more sluggish than those from other recessions. Turning to inflation, the CPI for February was released this morning.4 The headline CPI increased 0.4 percent, in line with our expectations.  Although food prices edged down 0.1 percent, higher gasoline prices boosted the energy component by 3.3 percent. Core CPI increased 0.2 percent, which was 0.1 percentage point above our forecast. Our miss was, at least in part, attributable to a jump in motor vehicle pricesan event which I am prepared to claim, with uncharacteristic confidence, either didnt happen or will be reversed in the next few months. Beyond the near term, we have marked down further our inflation projection, in response to the weaker outlook for economic activity, a stronger dollar, and lower oil prices. After increasing 2 percent in 2008, total PCE prices are now projected to increase  percent over the four quarters of this year and to increase  percent next year, with the projection for both years about  percentage point below our January 
forecast. We expect a smoother deceleration in core PCE prices, from 2 percent last year to 1 percent this year and  percent in 2010. There are sizable risks to both sides of our inflation projection.  On the one hand, many of our models are projecting a more pronounced deceleration of prices and a move into outright deflation by next year.  Those models appear to be expecting an appreciable decline in inflation expectations in response to wide margins of slack in resource utilization and low rates of headline inflation.  On the other hand, it is very difficult to discern any noticeable shift down in longer-term inflation expectations since last summer, even as headline inflation has come down in the wake of the 
       collapse of energy prices and the unemployment rate has jumped up.  We have taken the middle ground here and assumed that expectations will drift lower but by less than some of our models are projecting.  Steve will complete our presentation. MR. KAMIN. Following on Daves litany of woes about the U.S. economy, I can offer little comfort from the international arena except to say that were not alone in our troubles. Data weve received since your last meeting indicate that foreign GDP declined at a 7 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, much faster than we estimated in January and the sharpest quarterly declineby farsince the start of our series in 1970. Of course, while the phrase misery loves company rings true from a psychological standpoint, it doesnt work so well in economics.  As Ill discuss later on in my remarks, U.S. exports plunged in the fourth quarter and were a significant drag on U.S. growth. The fact that the rest of the world has joined the United States in recession is not all that surprising.  With the United States accounting for about a quarter of global 
GDP, and with the worlds major economies tightly linked through trade and finance, downturns in the U.S. economy historically have coincided with downturns in foreign growth. The big surprise has been which countries have been hit the hardest.  The United States, the United Kingdom, and the euro area, which have been at the epicenter of the financial crisis, registered fourth-quarter declines in GDP of merely 
6 to 7 percent. Conversely, in many economies whose banking and housing sectors 
were less affected by the initial turmoil, output dropped much more sharply:  by 10 percent in Mexico, 12 percent in Japan, 13 percent in Brazil, and more than 20 percent in Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. What accounts for the seemingly outsized response of many economies to the financial crisis?  Clearly, one factor at work here is that, as is typically the case in recessions, the demand for manufactures has fallen more sharply than demand for total goods and servicesthis has led to unusually sharp falloffs in exports by many Asian economies.  A second factor has been the collapse in commodity prices, which has weighed heavily on economies in Latin America and the Middle East.  Finally, since the intensification of the global crisis last fall, investors have been pulling out of many emerging market economies, disrupting the flow of credit to households and firms. Indicators for the current quarter are pointing to another 7 percent drop in foreign GDP, with activity declining at a similar pace in both the advanced and emerging market economies.  Industrial production, purchasing managers surveys, and 
business and consumer sentiment have either continued to fall in the past few months or are holding at the extraordinarily depressed levels reached late last year.  Our forecast has foreign output declining more gradually in the second quarter before bottoming out later this year and accelerating to nearly 3 percent by the end of 2010. If our forecast materializes, the foreign economy will have endured four quarters of contraction, the same as in the 19811982 recession, but much longer than the 
        slowdowns of 1974 and 2001. By the time the foreign economy touches bottom late this year, real GDP will have declined a record 4 percent, and we are projecting a weaker rebound thereafter than occurred following the prior downturns.  Accordingly, although it seems premature to be predicting the recovery when economies are still in 
free fall, our outlook does not seem entirely fanciful.  It does, however, depend importantly on a number of factors that remain up in the air, including a stabilization of financial conditions and the recovery of the U.S. economy. Given the difficult outlook, strong support from the public sector will be critical.  Foreign governments will be providing a substantial amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus over the next few quarters.  However, given the pace at which private demand is contracting and our uncertainties over its prospects, we judge this stimulus to be just adequate to secure the tepid recovery we are projecting, but insufficient to insure against any future negative shocks. Starting with monetary policy, Japan, Canada, and the United Kingdom already have cut policy rates to 50 basis points or below.  And although the ECBs target remains at a lofty 1 percent, the market rate itself has been trading in the neighborhood of 85 basis points. Accordingly, any significant further monetary support will have to come from balance-sheet expansions.  The Bank of England, 
Bank of Japan, and Swiss National Bank have moved forward on such measures in 
recent weeks, and we expect them to be followed by other major foreign central 
banks, but to what extent and with what ultimate effect on their economies remain 
open questions. In the emerging market economies, notwithstanding the pace at which output is contracting, we expect only moderate further policy loosening.  Central banks in Asia have already eased considerably, and a number of policy rates in the region are now at 2 percent or below. In Latin America, interest rates remain much further above the zero lower bound, but the falloff in capital inflows, associated sharp currency 
depreciations, and continued high inflation will likely restrain further rate cuts. Given the uncertainties associated with monetary policy, the need for fiscal support is all the more pressing.  By our estimates, recently announced fiscal plans 
should add about 1 percentage point to foreign growth, both in the advanced and emerging market economies, in 2009.  This represents considerable stimulus, roughly similar to that projected for the United States this year.  But as only the U.S. and Chinese plans provide significant additional stimulus in 2010, more effort will be 
required should the global recession prove more persistent than expected.  Moreover, many countries with high public debt or deficitssuch as Greece, Ireland, Hungary, and Turkey, to name just a feware constrained from substantial fiscal support and may even have to cut their budgets. If financial conditions ease enough to allow freer access to international capital markets, a number of governments may loosen monetary and fiscal policies further.  However, rather than stabilizing, there is a distinct risk that financial conditions could 
      take a turn for the worse. We are particularly concerned that the fragile situation in Eastern Europe could deteriorate into a full-fledged banking and balance-of-payments crisis, jeopardizing the condition of many western European banks and potentially triggering a global emerging markets meltdown. Such a crisis would not only deepen contractionary pressures in the world economy, but would prompt many governments to tighten their monetary and fiscal stance, just when accommodative policies were most needed. Even without an emerging markets meltdown, the global recession is having a profound effect on international trade and on the U.S. economy.  In the fourth quarter, 
U.S. real exports plunged at an annual rate of 25 percent.  This, by itself, would have subtracted more than 3 percentage points from U.S. GDP growth.  Because U.S. imports plunged as well, net exports subtracted a little under a half percentage point from GDP growth, but this is still a far cry from the nearly 2 percentage point positive contribution registered in the first half of 2008.  Going forward, we expect both imports and exports to drop off further this quarter and next as the recession here and abroad continues, with the contribution of net exports hovering around zero.  In the remainder of the forecast period, however, imports start picking up along with the 
U.S. economy, while exports remain moribund.  Although we see the economies of 
our trading partners recovering a bit faster than the U.S. economy, another outcomeof the global financial crisisthe nearly 20 percent rise in the dollar since last summerhelps support imports and restrain exports.  As a result, we predict net exports will subtract a half percentage point from U.S. GDP growth during the remainder of the forecast period, adding yet another headwind to a long and growing 
list.CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Questions for our colleagues? President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Mr. Stockton, what did you say about auto prices?  I didnt quite catch what made you believe they were going to reverse.   MR. STOCKTON. New vehicles prices were up nearly a percentage point, 0.8 percent, for February. I guess it was just more a hunch, given the incredible weakness in demand currently, and the fact that there still is a very high days supply.  It seems unlikely to me that we 
are on the verge of a turnaround in motor vehicle prices.  So we had actually been expecting a decline. We got an increase.  I am skeptical. MR. LACKER. Thanks. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. MR. STERN. Yes. Dave, the Administration has asserted that the fiscal policy package will preserve and/or increase jobs by 3 to 4 million in the next couple of years.  I was trying to figure out from your fiscal policy analysis what the comparable number was.  I couldnt quite get there, although my rough calculation was maybe 2 or 2 million. MR. STOCKTON. It centers on about 2 million, somewhere between 1 to 2 million jobs implicit in our package over the course of the next two years. MR. STERN. Okay. Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the international side, you talked about and our focus seems to be on Eastern Europe and the European banks.  But Im hearing a lot of concern about Mexico, both political meltdownreally serious civil disorder problems and, obviously, some economic implications.  Do you have any comments on the Mexican economy? MR. KAMIN. From an overall economic standpoint, the situation in Mexico is quite serious. First of all, for the past three or four years, Mexican growth has probably been less than we might have expected, given its proximity to the United States and our markets and given how much potential there was for the economy to grow if the right structural reforms were implemented.  In fact, a lot of those reforms have not been implemented.  Mexican growth has been sort of moribund. It has depended on the United States as a source of both external demand and jobs for its people. Now that the U.S. economy is going down, the Mexican economy is suffering pretty badly, as evidenced by the 10 percent annual rate of decline in GDP in the fourth quarter. 
 Let me just add that obviously it is facing very serious political problems as well.  There have been a lot of reports in the paper about drug problems and the violence associated with that.  So, clearly, on a wide range of issues, Mexico has got problems. Balance of payments and banking sector issues were of course front and center in Mexicos crisis of 94 and 95, and we would be hesitant to discount that possibility entirely now, but, interestingly, the banking system in Mexico seems to pose less risk than it might certainly less than the banking system in Eastern Europe and probably less than those in other emerging market economies.  First of all, a large share of its banks are foreign-owned, and that represents some source of stability.  On top of that, the banks that are operating there appear to be less dependent on short-term wholesale sources of financing.  So their situation is a little better. Obviously, the situation could take a turn for the worse in the coming year if the decline in output is sufficiently large that nonperforming loans go up a lot. But for right now, as I say, while Mexico has got a lot of problems on the balance of payments and on the banking fronts, the issues dont seem as pronounced. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Others?  No other questions?  [No response.] Okay. Then, were ready to begin our economic go-round.  Im going to start with President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy is in recession. Its possibly somewhat less severe than in some parts of the country, but still a very sharp recession. All of the problems that we see nationally are certainly apparent in the Eighth District, including credit market problems, deeply depressed auto sales, declining house prices, and so on. The national economy appears to have weakened further relative to January expectations. I think theres further downside risk, and I agree with many here that the main risk is some kind of failure to get the financial sector on track toward recovery.  The global aspect of 
     the downturn continues unabated. I think this is a very worrisome factor.  Its largely outside our historical experience in the modern era.  It may be that were not fully comprehending the meaning of global events because they havent really been part of our experience.  And Im worried about that. I think expectations remain very fluid, both for the course of the real economy and for inflation. We know that expectations have a huge influence on macroeconomic outcomes.  That influence is partially masked in normal times:  In normal times, expectations are very stable; in normal times, for output, the private sector would expect something close to the balanced growth path; in normal times, for inflation, the private sector would expect something close to the implicit inflation target pursued by the central bank.  So, in normal times, it appears that 
expectations dont move that much, and, perhaps, therefore, are not so important to how the economy is going to function. But these are not normal times.  As a result, expectations are very fluid and can be significantly influenced by just a few events.  Its as if the private sector is throwing out all of the old data, because the old data come from a different regime that doesnt apply anymore, and theyre looking at the most recent developments, just a few things that are happening, and deciding which direction the economy is likely to go and which direction inflation is likely to go. This is what makes me especially worried about the economy and the inflation path during 2009.  In particular, I think further disinflation and possible deflation is a clear near-term risk. Deflationary expectations could become entrenched during 2009, especially given the downside risks to the forecast, including the global nature of the very sharp downturn and the possibility that the financial sector problems wont be addressed in an appropriate way or quickly enough.  Deflation would exacerbate problems in the housing sector and credit markets generally because 
 of the prevalence of nominal contracting in the economy.  So I think a near-term goal for monetary policy is to avoid this outcome.  In the medium term, we actually face inflation risk, because the expansion of the balance sheet would suggest lots of inflation possibilities out there.  I call this a two-headed dragon. But if we get stuck in a deflationary trap, youre never going to see that materialize.  And, again, a deflationary trap is, to my thinking, a steady state:  You get stuck there, and you cannot get out. Is a deflationary trap a real possibility?  We have the clear example of Japan.  We have foreign central banks sending their policy rates to zero globally.  Our own model and our own baseline forecast have core PCE inflation at 1 percent in 2009, and below 1 percent for 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. With an economy in that kind of state for that long, suppose you get another negative shock at some point; then, you do go down to the deflation trap equilibrium and get stuck there.  So I really think its a problem for the near termthat we could get stuck in that 
trap. Policy should attempt to avoid letting deflationary expectations take hold.  How should we do this?  I really liked the Bank of Englands announcement during the intermeeting period.  They said that they were planning to expand the balance sheet to increase the monetary base.  They said that they expected that to feed through to the broader money stock measures and that the growth in the money stock would help them to maintain their medium-term inflation target.  I thought that was a crystal-clear piece of communication, and the markets understand exactly what it means and what the intent of policy is.  So I thought that that was a good example to follow. Those are my comments on the economy.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
    MR. FISHER. I was first going to say to Dave Stockton that our wives have an affinity for T-shirts. My wife, a smart Wellesley woman who spent most of her time at MIT, arrived at Oxford noting that the ratio of women to men was 1 to 11.  She had a T-shirt for other women which she sold briskly, and it said, Come to Oxford where the odds are good, but the goods are odd. [Laughter] Mr. Chairman, I want to report on the microeconomic input I received from my corporate contacts, which numbered some 29 CEOs around the country whom I talked to before this meeting.  Unfortunately, it confirms what Dave and Steve presented.  In fact, one actually called 
me and said, Do you want some good news? And I said, Please.  He said, Call somebody else. [Laughter] As to our District, we have fallen finally into recession.  We created jobs last year.  I believe we are the only District that did create jobs last year, or had jobs created in the District.  The cut is less severeit will take fewer stitches to mendbut, nonetheless, we have been cut. As to the national economy, my favorite indicators are all negative.  There are 175,000 railcars that are out of commission. There has been some improvement in bulk shipping rates, but that is a head fake according to shippers I have talked to, because of the extraordinary purchase of iron ore that China undertook recentlyin fact, record amounts.  If you look at containers and other shipping indicators, these are all flat to negative.  Of the worlds large aircraft fleet, 20 percentthats 2,800 airplanesare now sitting unused in the desert.  If you look at Boeings numbers, it received only four orders for new aircraft versus several hundred last February. And Im told by my contacts in the airline industry that the Chinese government has ordered all of their carriers not to take the liberty of buying a single plane in 2009.  That from one of the largest net new buyers of aircraft in the world. 
    There is very little cap-ex taking place. In fact, every corporate contact I spoke to, from the large manufacturers to even Disney, is cutting back on cap-ex and displaying all kinds of microeconomic behavioral patterns that indicate the kind of deflationary trap that my colleague just spoke about. Weve talked about them before, but the essence is they are withholding decisions. Theyre withholding decisions because they hope to get it done cheaper later.  Theyre also withholding decisions because they are confused.  And you see this in some of the data from those that touch many consumers in the country, as well.  For example, according to AT&T, its large enterprise business has just stopped; its small business demand is in decline; its 800 services are down. And, very interestingly, overall minutes are declining significantly.  One of the indications of movement of people is roaming minutes.  Roaming minutes domestically and internationally, according to the CEO of AT&T, have come to a screeching halt. The picture is similar if you talk to people in the travel and entertainment business, which I do like to look at. If you aggregate it properly, not just airline travel, not just hotels, but sports and entertainment and all that derives from it, its a significantly sized industry.  According to Disneys CEO, travel and entertainment is down 46 percent year-over-year in February.  Thats confirmed by the number of credit card transactions, which are up, but the total amount is down.  
According to the CEO of JCPenney, whom Im fortunate to have on my board, this is going to manifest itself in further contraction, with particular risk in the commercial real estate area.  The chairman of the retail federation estimates that, of 1,100 major malls in the United States, a third will fail over the course of the next three years.  This is not happy news.  Part of it has to do with the lack of debtor-in-possession financing. Without DIP financing, you accelerate the process.  And I dont know how we are ever going to deal with that situation. 
 I couldnt find any silver linings.  There is, I suppose, a pewter lining, as I like to call it.  And, Governor Tarullo, without any insult to your industry, one of the virtues is that the legal industry is also contracting [laughter]; 6,000 people were laid off from major law firms year to date. Theres a website that actually tracks this.  Whats interesting about it is that the transaction business has dried up and is not being compensated for by the bankruptcy business.  I think the reason the bankruptcy business is not proceeding is because debtor-in-possession financing is very hard to come by and remains a problem. Theres also another pewter lining in the Wal-Mart reports:  Gas price declines have added $120 to $130 per customer per month.  The CEO, however, noted some inflation in apparel prices thus far this year, but they believe that is also a head fake, because they can tell from their own inventory that eventually those prices will have to come down. So overall, Mr. Chairman, the situation is bleak.  The key underlying weak factor that I hear about from CEO after CEO, from microeconomic operator after microeconomic operator, big or small, is a lack of confidence.  When I first walked onto the training floors of Brown Brothers 37 years ago, Robert Roosa gave me a quote that I havent forgotten, which came from James Madison:  The circulation of confidence is better than the circulation of money.  There is no confidence. I want to come back to a statement I made yesterday, and Ill withhold my comments on policy until the next round.  In order to instill confidence, first, it takes time and, second, you have to exhibit competence.  And in order to exhibit competence, I think you have to keep things simple.  I came away from yesterdays session deeply concerned about our conversation about 
the TALF and the complexity with which were engaging in policy.  And I hope we can figure out a way to do what we do in the simplest, most communicative manner possible.  Im worried 
    that we are turning to the shadow banking system to solve problems that they put us into in the first place. Ill just conclude with an analogy as a teaser for what I expect to say in the next round, and thats the following. We have to be very, very careful that we dont give a steam shovel and a case of Red Bull to the people who dug us into the hole we are in and who have undermined confidence and have put us in a predicament thats extremely difficult to get out of.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by congratulating you on having a highway interchange named after you.  Im sure we all envy you having your own off-ramp.  [Laughter] Conditions in the Sixth District remain very weak, and our contacts expect worsening conditions in the near term.  Businesses have made significant workforce reductions and tell us they are prepared to make additional cuts if economic conditions worsen. The end of the first quarter was seen by some as being a key milestone.  If business conditions have not improved by then, they will move further to put their businesses in survival mode, so more layoffs could be 
forthcoming in April.  All sectors of commercial real estate are under pressure from growing vacancy rates and upward adjustment of cap rates.  Im concerned that growing problems in commercial real estate are likely to further complicate efforts to stabilize the banking system and credit markets. Theres anecdotal evidence of alarm being expressed about and by the local government sector. Some jurisdictions and authorities are pinched not only by falling revenues but also by borrowing conditions in the municipal finance market.  One large city mayor estimated several 
    thousand private sector job losses from projects not helped by the stimulus package that will shut down in the near term due to financing difficulties. Our directors and their contacts, as well as financial market contacts, are becoming increasingly vocal over the lack of specificity regarding economic policy and their inability to understand what we would call our decision rules.  A major source of confusion is uncertainty about what policy actions will come next and under what circumstances expansions of current policy will be decided. Turning to the national economic conditions in the outlook, the numbers indicate we remain in serious recession, with most data coming in worse than Atlantas already downbeat expectations. If we were to submit a formal forecast for this meeting, we would adjust our trajectory for the economy downward and push the timing of the beginning of a recovery further out. As mentioned earlier by Dave Stockton, one positive in the recent data is retail sales numbers.  However, the CFO of the countrys second largest retailer advised a cautious interpretation of sales numbers. Consumer purchases are occurring in an environment of deep price discounts and may not be a very solid indicator of improving economic health.  Also, 
retailers are consolidating their inventories as they prepare for store closures. We believe the risks remain to the downside for both economic growth and inflation.  In my conversations this time with a few financial market participants and bankers, there was acknowledgement of improved conditions in a number of markets, particularly where the Fed continues to intervene. Also, progress of investment-grade corporate funding markets was noted.  At the same time, there was sentiment that the Feds credit programs may have to stay in place for quite some time, well into 2010. 
  On the subject of the housing and home mortgage market, I heard the view that the magic rate threshold for qualifying mortgage applications volume is 5 percent.  When rates drop below 5 percent, refinancing volume especially has picked up markedly. To repeat what I said yesterday, most of the sharpest comments dealt with the perceived policy ambiguity and the effect of this on markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We are more than a year into this recession, and yet the decline in GDP and deterioration in labor markets continue unabated and, indeed, continue to surprise on the downside. While Im hopeful that our actions and the fiscal stimulus package will help to stabilize the economy in the second half of the year, the downside risks to our forecast remain my primary concern.  Like the Greenbook, the Boston Fed forecast 
expects that the unemployment rate will remain well above full employment, and inflation will remain well below my target throughout the forecast horizon.  Indeed, the Boston Fed forecast implies a high probability of a deflationary period if aggressive action is not taken. Concerns with credit availability continue to be a dominant theme when I talk to businesses of all sizes. Lenders are looking for opportunities to tighten terms of lending agreements, and rollover of financing agreements remains problematic.  In anticipation of continuing financing difficulties, firms report that they are restricting operations.  Even organizations that normally would build through a downturn, such as hospitals and major universities, have halted projects, leaving holes and half-finished buildings at many construction sites in Boston. I see several worrisome near-term concerns that are likely to impede more-normal financial market functioning.  First, once we have reworked the initial submissions of the stress 
    tests, the results for several major banks are unlikely to be consistent with public pronouncements by some major banks that additional capital is not necessary.  As our baseline forecast is quickly converging to the stress scenario used in the exercise, there is a real risk of loss of public credibility as it becomes apparent that some large banks will need substantially more capital, which in the current environment can only be supplied by the government.  I am concerned that stock prices and credit markets may suffer additional setbacks and make some of our forecasts for the stock market going forward a little more problematic. Second, the delays in removing problem assets will continue to cast a shadow on many asset prices. We may need to move to simpler, more straightforward solutions for removal of problem assets, possibly in conjunction with the additional equity infusions at the end of the stress tests. Third, like President Lockhart, Im very worried about the commercial real estate sector, which is rapidly deteriorating. Neither the CMBS market nor banks are likely to provide much support for the rollover of commercial real estate financing.  And Im increasingly concerned about life insurance companies, which have traditionally been significant investors in commercial real estate, as share prices of the major publicly held life insurers are now for the most part selling at less than one-fifth of what they were six months ago, likely resulting in a limited financial capacity to provide commercial real estate financing.  In addition, the decline in commercial real estate prices is putting many commercial properties under water, adding to financing constraints. While we normally do not consider life insurers to be a source of systemic 
concerns that would have significant impacts on markets, that assumption may be tested over the course of this year. 
 Finally, stabilizing the housing sector is critically important.  While a small component of GDP, the impact of housing problems has been disproportionate to its weight in GDP.  Declines in housing prices continue to limit borrowing capacity for households, cause large losses in household wealth that slow future consumption, and contribute to the significant losses embedded in mortgage instruments and related derivative products for a variety of financial intermediaries.  While recently announced federal programs should help, those programs may not fully reflect the new reality that job losses are likely to be the primary reason that borrowers cannot make payments.  We held a mortgage foreclosure event in Hartford, Connecticut last 
month, attended by roughly 900 borrowers. Discussions with the borrowers at the event, and subsequent survey results, indicate that job losses among one or more family members were already a key driver in pushing borrowers to foreclosure.  Taking aggressive action to stabilize housing and employment may be particularly important at this juncture.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I would say that the Tenth District is going to reflect very much what you have heard in the national briefing.  It was doing better than the nation as a whole but is now quickly deteriorating into the national average.  Our labor markets have continued to deteriorate.  Unemployment rates are going up in each of our states.  Our manufacturing activity has actually plummeted, importantly because of the weakening of the export market that was mentioned earlier.  Our agricultural sector is still holding its own, but it, too, is showing signs of weakening, as is our energy industry.  Commercial real estate is showing signs of weakening because of some of the refinancing thats now required and because of the 
  increasing vacancies that are affecting the cash flows off these and, therefore, affecting some of the parties holding these notes. I would point out, too, that financing in the region has deteriorated, Id say badly almost, and Ill give you one anecdote.  I understand that its not hard data, but it gives you a sense of the situation. We have an insurance company that does premium financing, about $1 billion financed out of a major New York bank.  It went back to refinance a portion of the loan, and the bank wanted LIBOR plus 500. The CEO of this company said, You know, I understand I have to help recapitalize that industry, but this is taking all my profit.  So it is trying to get other types of financing.  And that kind of pressure is, of course, trickling down and affects how they do business as well. So it is a pretty daunting task for businesses in this type of environment, I realize. Finally, when we look across the District, were seeing increasing numbers of problem banks, as well as banks that we would put on a watch list because of the concentrations in, say, real estate or some sectors of agriculture.  So, overall, the District is reflecting the deteriorating conditions in the nation as a whole, and, that is, of course, a concern to us as well as to everyone else here. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Third District economy remains very weak, and there are few signs that this weakness will lessen any time soon.  The three-state 
region hit its employment peak in January 2008.  Since then, it has lost 1.8 percent of its jobs, and 60 percent of that loss has come just in the last three months.  You might step back and say, Well, maybe this is the darkness before the dawn.  I wish I had confidence in that, but Im not sure thats whats going on.  It looks pretty bleak. 
 Our Business Outlook Survey is set to be released at 10:00 tomorrow morning, so its confidential until then. Last months reading was near a record of minus 41.  The reading that will be reported tomorrow morning is minus 35, so its some improvement.  We usually take about five points as being statistically significant, so this is just at that margin.  A few months ago, the index went up and just fell back down again.  So I dont know that theres a whole lot of comfort in the most recent number; I take it to mean things are about the same as they were.  Survey participants do expect the outlook to improve in the next six months.  But many of the forward-looking indicators suggest that before that comes about there will be further cutbacks in employment and further retrenchment in capital investment at our regional manufacturers. Although banks in the Third District are in somewhat better shape than the national averagethey tend to be doing pretty wellthey do report consumer loan volume is down.  And 
many of them also report that companies dont want to invest and dont want to borrow money at this point. So its demand retrenchment rather than just supply retrenchment, from their perspective. Bankers in general in our District are angrytheyre mad, theyre furious at the government.  Im getting requests to give TARP money back at an increasing pace.  Theyre not 
being allowed to do it, or nobody at the Treasury is helping them do that.  They are, as President Lockhart said, frustrated with the lack of clarity about where policy is going and what its going to be. Theyre angry about the changes in the rules of the game, the ground shifting beneath their feet. And theyre frustrated that some of the programs arent doing what theyre supposed to be doing. I have one major player in the student loan industry saying that the TALF is not going to do anything for student loans, which, by and large, are 7- to 10-year loans in view of the time it takes to get through college.  So buying new issues of three-year loans wont help them, 
 because they dont offer many student loans for three years.  I can go down the list of many other industries who feel the same way.  Whom are we going to bail out, whom are we going to protect, and whom are we going to support going forward?  I think theres a lot of angst, a lot of uncertainty, and a lot of frustration out there in the business community and the financial community in particular. So our District economys outlook looks largely in line with that of the national economy.  As President Bullard suggested, one of the things that has been most worrying in the recent episode is the dramatic decline in foreign countries and the impact thats having.  Thats something we cant do much about directly, but it is worrying, and, again, its causing more angst and more fear and more problems. Now, amidst this downpour of bad news and numbers, there is a possible ray of sunshine.  I noteas Dave Stockton didthat the consumption numbers seem to suggest that the free fall in consumption may have come to an end.  I hope thats the case; that would be encouraging.  Both retail sales and disposable income numbers have held up in the last couple of months, and personal consumption expenditures have as well. The last two months of consumer price inflation data suggest to me that the risk of a sustained deflation, at least in the near term, is somewhat abated.  So Im not as concerned as some arePresident Bullard, for exampleabout the shift to sustained deflationary expectations. Although I think we have to worry about it, thats not my number one concern at this point. Overall, my outlook for the national economy is pessimistic for the near term, although I continue to have a lot of belief that markets eventually will recover, so I may be a little more optimistic on a recovery than the Greenbook. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic and financial news has been grim.  Things are now so bad that I actually open the Greenbook with greater trepidation than my 401(k). [Laughter] The awful employment and spending data have not been much of a surprise, but they do dispel remaining hopes that we might see a turnaround any time soon.  This conclusion is reinforced by what Im hearing from my business contacts.  Their already sour mood is taking another sharp turn for the worse.  One director reported that businesses were so 
shaken that it would take a sustained period of positive data, on the order of six to nine months, before they would begin to consider expanding production and employment.  Another disturbing sign of how tough things are getting is that people appear to be breaking into their piggybanks to make ends meetthe Cash Product Office reports huge increases in the amount of coins being brought into our inventory.  [Laughter] The December inventories of quarters and dollar coins 
were up more than 50 percent from 2007, and even pennies were up nearly 25 percent. Looking ahead, some more-optimistic forecasters have argued that were likely to see a rapid V-shaped recovery similar to the ones that followed several past severe postwar recessions.  The case for such an outcome is that housing construction and purchases of durable goods, especially cars, have been running way below trend for some time.  Over time, these capital stocks will fall well below desired levels, and eventually investment must rise to bring stocks back in line with fundamentals.  The resulting pent-up demand may lead to a surge in spending once the financial system regains its health and uncertainty is diminished. But my fear is that we may not even get a modest U-shaped recovery, much less a V-shaped one. I have three reasons for this pessimism. First, the global nature of the recession means we cant rely on foreign demand to provide support for our economy.  Instead, a sharp 
 downturn abroad and recent dollar appreciation have driven down our exports and exacerbated our downturn. Indeed, given the high degree of synchronization among all of the major economies of the world, this is the first truly global recession since the Depression.  Furthermore, as the downturn has spread to more countries, new cracks have developed in the already strained banking system.  Steve discussed the situation in Eastern Europe, and we share his concerns.  These countries have an estimated $1 trillion of debt to Western European banks, and its fortunate that U.S. banks have little exposure in this region.  But loans from Austrian banks to Eastern Europe exceed 80 percent of Austrias GDP, and the exposure of banks in Sweden and Belgium exceeds 30 percent of GDP.  Severe losses on these loans do pose significant threats to the banking systems in these countries. My second concern is that, despite our best efforts at using both traditional and nontraditional monetary tools, the stance of credit market conditions has only improved 
modestly. In past recessions, the Fed has been able to fuel a turnaround rapidly by stepping on the accelerator through sharp rate cuts. But in the current crisis, it feels more like we are desperately trying to power a bicycle uphill rather than pressing an accelerator on a high-powered sports car. This conclusion is supported by work by my staff that aims to gauge the stance of credit market conditions.  In particular, we use principal components analysis on a set of private sector interest rates to construct a metric of credit conditions that in normal times moves very closely with the real federal funds rate.  According to this metric, we were basically treading water during much of the last year, with our policy actions roughly neutralizing the effects of the credit crisis on private rates.  Since September and the introduction of more aggressive policy actions by the Fed, the FDIC, and the Treasury, this metric of credit market conditions has improved somewhat and is now at a level consistent with a modest degree of 
  accommodation, but nowhere near as much accommodation as implied by the level of the real fed funds rate or called for by the stance of the economy.  And, of course, this analysis abstracts from non-price terms of credit, and those continue to tighten as well.  We see that in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  And one community banker on my board mentioned that he finds 
it now difficult to summon the emotional energy to make loans to anybody at all. A third reason to doubt that we will enjoy a V-shaped recovery is the huge damage that has been done to balance sheets. Household wealth has plummeted:  It fell more than $5 trillion in the fourth quarter alone. Unfortunately, households were not well positioned for such a shot to wealth. Instead, many had leveraged up to the hilt, and the combination of the dramatic loss in wealth and the massive household debt overhang portends years of subdued spending as households go through an extended period of deleveraging.  I see worrisome parallels to the Japanese corporate sector during the 1990s.  In that case, the attempt of firms to pay down debt produced a decade of weak investment.  The downward pressure on household leverage will come both from lenders and from households.  Lenders are likely to demand more collateral for loans going forward, and that collateral has been devastated by the collapse of housing and other wealth; and households are likely to recognize the benefits of stronger balance sheets for precautionary reasons and meeting longer-term goals, such as down-payment requirements and 
retirement.  As one of my directors quipped, people may come to realize that they dont need three carsthey can get by with two and maybe even just one.  The outlook for inflation is worrisome as well. I think its fair to say it is no longer a risk that inflation will persist for a time below the preferred rateinstead, its our expectation.  Whats more, the probability of outright deflation is significant.  In that regard, Im closely monitoring wage developments, as I view the outbreak of sizable wage cuts to be a crucial step 
  leading to sustained deflation. I have heard scattered reports of such cuts, but so far the majority of my directors say theyre reluctant to cut wages for fear that it would undermine employee morale. Nonetheless, many of them cautioned that if the economy continues to deteriorate, they will have no choice but to cut wages and salaries. So, to summarize, I dont see forces at work that will propel our economy into sustained robust recovery any time soon.  Even though the Greenbook forecast is hardly upbeat, I see substantial downside risk to that forecast, both for economic activity and inflation. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The reports from my contacts have been very weak for months now.  In order to get a better sense of the outlook, I asked some of my contacts some questions focused on whether their responses thus far to the recession have been enough to prepare them for the weakness that they are anticipating in their markets.  Unfortunately, the vast majority of them said that they had not done enough and that they continue to curtail their activities and investments at a very quick pace.  And their confidence in a recovery later on this year is dwindling. I am concerned that this lack of confidence is translating into actions that will further dampen our prospects in coming months.  I was surprised that even some of the more successful manufacturers in my District, such as Eaton, Lincoln Electric, and Parker-Hannifin, are all implementing further cutbacks in investments, hiring, and production plans.  In several cases, 
these further cutbacks have been motivated by this deepening retrenchment that we are seeing 
with our foreign partners. But some of my contacts are losing confidence in the policy responses to the recession. Several of my directors noted last week at our meeting that public confidence is obviously critical to our recovery plans, yet the public is increasingly finding the governments 
  response confusing and incomplete.  This lack of confidence is weighing on their expectations for growth this year and even next year. Now, my directors are certainly supportive of the actions that the Federal Reserve has taken, particularly the stress-testing that we are doing of banks and the long-term asset purchases.  However, they are concerned that the communications about some of the other government programssome of the Treasury planshave been unclear, and, therefore, are hampering the recovery.  Mr. Chairman, I think that your interview on 60 Minutes played a helpful role in clarifying some of these programs, and I did receive many calls from directors and business contacts saying that they thought the interview was well received. Like the staff, I revised down my projection for output and inflation based on the incoming data, and, obviously, the weakening global outlook.  My projection is very much in line with the Greenbook baseline, although in my projection the unemployment rate peaks at 10 percent, because I dont anticipate as much of a cutback in the participation rate as the Greenbook does. Also, I do think that the outlook calls for a larger policy response.  In my baseline, Ive incorporated the simulations on additional nontraditional policies.  I know the Greenbook hasnt, because they are obviously difficult to include in a numeric projection.  But at this point, I have included some of that policy response in my outlook. In my view, the risks remain very much weighted to the downside for both output and inflation. Given the repeated markdowns that weve made to our projections, I think more downside misses are likely to make it more difficult to restore confidence that we are dealing with the economic crisis appropriately.  At this point, neither the projections nor any of the anecdotal reports that I have received are likely to make a difference in or shift our policy response. We are in the midst of an economic decline that doesnt have concrete signs of a 
 developing recovery. I think we need to react to the current crisis thoroughly, but also with as much as clarity as possible. I know weve talked a lot about the focus on our communications of what we are doing. I do think that is critical at this point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I fully agree we are certainly in the midst of a significant contraction.  Back in January when I submitted my forecast for the first half of the year, I had the economy declining at an annual rate of 4 percent, which is now quite close to the Greenbook number. The question Ive been asking myself is:  Should I mark the forecast down further and push the recovery off further?  So far, Im not fully convinced that thats the right response, in part because, as Dave Stockton noted, the basic case for recovery is the same as it has beenstimulative monetary and fiscal policy, gradual further improvement in financial market conditions, and the internal dynamics associated with the corrections that occur during a recession; that is, production and employment decline, an inventory correction process occurs, ultimately aggregate supply falls below even diminished aggregate demand, and then you have set the stage for the expansion. Moreover, as a veteran of many, many forecasting exercises, Ive seen some of this phenomenon before.  Theres a tendency in the midst of a serious recession, especially if youre doing bottom-up forecasting and going through the various components of aggregate demand 
consumer spending on durables, nondurables, servicesto take a look at each component and say to yourself, Well, that cant get better any time soon.  And by the time youve gone through that, youve eliminated all possibilities of any component getting better any time soon.  So you wind up with a forecast with a very extended recession. 
   Finally, theres only one other point Id make.  Its not meant to provide a lot of comfort but just to suggest that it wouldnt take all that much for the recovery to get under way in the third quarter, albeit initially quite sluggishly.  I just did an arithmetic exercisethats all it is and if consumer spending in the aggregate grew at 1 to 2 percent rate in the third and fourth quarters, that would turn those negative GDP numbers in the Greenbook into slightly positive GDP numbers. The only reason I make that point is that it wouldnt take all that much.  Consumer spending has shown some signs of leveling off, so it may be that theres some silver lining there. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The clear deterioration in the real economic outlook since our last meeting is consistent with the information we had from the Fifth District.  All our survey indexes remained at very low levels.  The forward-looking components of most weakened as well.  The Carolinas have been particularly hard-hit in recent months.  Their economy is manufacturing-intensive and export-oriented, more so than the rest of the country, and their housing markets, which had lagged the national cycle, have weakened substantially in the last year. I was pleasantly surprised by the retail sales numbers and the Greenbooks improved outlook for consumption expenditures, which suggest that diminishing marginal returns to cutbacks in discretionary spending may be setting in.  Im a little wary about making too much of it. I think the weak labor market is going to weaken further, and the possibility of further declines in wealth could easily drive household spending down another step. Id note though that in more normal times a significant deterioration in the forecast from one Greenbook to the next would bring with it a revision in the assumed policy path for the fed 
  funds rate. Now that were at zero, Id expect a commensurate revision in the path for our balance sheet. If Im reading the Greenbook correctly, the staff hasnt made any change to their baseline policy assumptions, and I would have thought the Greenbook would have built in more expansion of credit programs or the monetary base or both. In this context, its striking that, as I mentioned yesterday, the monetary base has declined by $200 billion since the beginning of the year.  Im looking at daily averages over the first two weeks of January versus the period ending, I think, March 11.  I understand some big MBS transactions settled on March 12, so theres a tiny little spike in the figures.  But, still, that was striking. The base obviously remains at a very high level, consistent with our statements, but I wonder if that $200 billion decline means that we tightened policy since the beginning of the year. I dont think we know one way or the other, but Id think we would want to make sure we increase the base whenever the outlook deteriorates significantly.  This is why I think it would be useful for us to begin outright purchases of Treasuries, and moreover, Id like to suggest that we explicitly direct the Desk to make sure that the monetary base expands by a significant amount during the policy periodmaybe even put the number into the directive for the intermeeting period.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The executive summary for my business reports this round is: Things have never been so bad.  This view is essentially unchanged from January; they werent happy then either. These reports seem to represent a continuation of the severe contraction rather than additional negative impulses.  But thats not especially comforting, as this is shaping up to be the worst economic downturn since the 1930s.  But President Sterns comments did make me feel better about the outlook, so I certainly hope Im wrong there. 
   The Greenbooks presentation of an unconstrained optimal monetary policy response was striking in my opinion.  The size of the policy gap is so large that quibbling over differences in model specifications and the like seems beside the point.  I was contemplating asking Dave Stockton what it would take to generate inflationmaybe if potential output was less favorable than we think, thats how it would happen.  But I couldnt imagine that the answer would change my opinion because they had one scenario that went some ways towards that already.  I think this gap is representative of the tremendous amount of economic slack that we are facing.  If adequate policy actions are not forthcoming or are not feasible, then larger and longer-lasting economic costs may be looming.  Many of my contacts noted that if the economy did not find a bottom soon, they would be in for another round of major reductions in productive capacity.  They specifically noted the likelihood of cuts in core labor forces and capital infrastructures.  These adjustments would be very costly to undo when the economy eventually recovers. The commentary I heard on financial market difficulties suggests that our credit policies are now fighting against even greater headwinds than before, but its unclear how we might counteract this additional deterioration directly.  In addition to continuing concerns about credit supply, more contacts are noting that the severe contraction is causing the credit quality of borrowers to deteriorate. Ford said that when theyre making auto loans, the banks seemed to be getting the better-credit-quality buyers at the moment, but they said that their rejections on retail financing were 50 percent now, which is up 10 percentage points.  Federal Reserve, Treasury, and FDIC programs have eased credit supply conditions somewhat and hopefully will lead to 
more improvement, but the reduced creditworthiness looms as a potentially even larger problem than restrictive credit supply. 
     In terms of the likely effectiveness of the TALF, I heard a number of different perspectives from my contacts.  Discover Financial said the current TALF spreads were too wide to be attractive. Nonetheless, they thought the TALF would be a useful backstop.  They also said they would consider using it, especially if investors became willing to accept somewhat smaller rates of return, that is, low double-digit returns.  Investors in the middle of this transaction seem to be doing very well without really accepting a lot of riskIm not sure theyre bringing a lot to the table, frankly. Ford was expecting to place several billion dollars of securities backed by consumer auto loans with TALF borrowers.  They thought this would be quite helpful, but on the other hand, both Ford and GM indicated that they would like to use the TALF to finance dealer inventories. However, the high cost for credit enhancements to secure a triple-A rating would make it uneconomical for them to do so. As a central bank, our credit policies are necessarily conservative.  They are aimed primarily at improving credit supply conditions by lending on prudent terms.  But what makes the terms prudent to us results in many issuers seeing the TALF as being too restrictive and on unattractive terms.  I said to one CEO who was complaining of this that, if we were a private financial company with this pricing policy, we wouldnt last a week.  Indeed, those firms with access to the TLGP were unanimous in preferring that source of funding to the TALF.  Several of these also advocated expanding the borrowing capacity under the TLGP, and firms without access to the TLGP were lobbying to get in.  Such are the benefits and distortions of our public programs.  So my reading is that the prudent terms for the TALF make it less attractive and 
suggest its take-up rate and effectiveness may be limited. Im not advocating changes necessarilyIm just reporting that its macroeconomic effectiveness may be smaller than the economy needs. 
 Framing the monetary policy discussion with a viewpoint on the national economic outlook is fairly simple this time.  Although I could cite some differences between my forecast and the Greenbooks projections, these differences do not change three material observations.  First, enormous resource gaps through 2010 for sure will continue to require aggressive monetary accommodation with nonstandard tools. Second, for the foreseeable future, 
disinflationary forces seem strong enough that aggressive monetary policy accommodation would not impose undue risk to our price stability goal.  Third, to offset these disinflationary forces, a sharp rise in inflation expectations would be necessary.  I think it would have to be exogenous. Its not in my forecast.  The circumstances by which this would occur are hard to predict, although commentators point to risks from the expansion of our balance sheet and future fiscal deficits.  I do not expect these will have a quantitatively important impact on inflation expectations over the next couple of years. Finally, the Greenbooks baseline is so dismal that, with the unemployment rate headed to 9 percent and a substantial disinflation in train, even the most optimistic alternative scenarios do not see an increase in the fed funds rate before 2013.  This is sobering. None of us are accustomed to thinking that a prolonged period of zero short-term interest rates will be associated with a lack of inflationary pressures.  For virtually all of our contemporary monetary memories, inflation has been above desirable levels in the U.S.  This is an enormous challenge to our thinking and to our typical approaches to monetary policy strategy.  Indeed, the FRB/US calculations where inflation did overshoot were premised on the idea that these Taylor shocks would lead to an increase in inflationary expectations.  That is, that they are very accommodative.  But we dont see that in our analysis at the moment. 
  I began to think about the policymaker who equally weights his or her displeasure on either NAIRU or output and inflation gaps, which are the underpinnings for the optimal policy in the Bluebook. Were looking at an output gap in the Greenbook of 8 percentage points, so with equally weighted displeasure, you ought to be willing to accept inflation that is somewhat higher than your target. Given these large expected output gaps, even a borderline inflation nutter would be willing to accept a substantial risk of overshooting in the inflation target.  So the bottom line, in my opinion, is that a well-designed program of substantial nontraditional 
monetary accommodation, in concert with clearly specified dual mandate goals and reasonable 
safeguards, will keep long-term inflation expectations anchored.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In general, I think the Greenbook baseline forecast is pretty sensible. The New York Fed view is not much different, but, echoing President Sterns comments, I can also tell a credible story of why the rate of economic contraction first slows, then the economy reverses direction as we move into the second half of 2009: The inventory cycle turns from negative to positive, the decline in housing activity ends, mainly because theres no room to fall further, and fiscal stimulus provides support to consumer spending and cushions the downward adjustment in state and local government outlays. Unfortunately that doesnt tell us much about 2010 and beyond.  In my view, the longer-term outlook rests on the answers to two key questions.  First, what is the desired household saving rate?  Where is it headed, and how rapidly will we get there? Or to put it somewhat differently, echoing President Yellen, where is the household sector in its deleveraging process?  And, second, will the financial system stabilize and credit availability steadily improve over the next couple of quarters?  Of course, these two interact. If we dont get 
 an improvement in credit availability, asset prices will go down further, and that will feed back into the household saving rate. The fourth-quarter flow of funds data were, I think, as expected.  Theyre going to show this 9 percent drop in household net worth, which brings the ratio of household net worth to income back to levels not seen since the mid-1990s.  That would seem to imply that the household saving rate, which is currently around 5 percent, will likely need to rise even further.  
And the question is: To what level?  There has to be quite a bit of uncertainty about that both in terms of where we are going and how fast we are going to get there.  One possible benchmark would be the household saving rate of the early 1990s, which was slightly below 8 percent.  If thats where were headed, Id say thats probably doable while still having an economic recovery, although it is considerably higher than the Greenbook forecast of 5 percent this year and next. An 8 percent rate does not seem too high a bar, given that we have a lot of fiscal stimulus coming.  The fact that most of the stimulus will be saved does not mean that the stimulus has been ineffective, since the counterfactual in this case might be that the households would have had to reduce their spending in order to achieve their new desired level of savings. However, one could argue that theres a risk that an 8 percent household saving rate may be too low. Demographics may imply the need for a higher saving rate now, given that the working-age population is much older now than it was in the 1990s; in other words, if we adjust for the age mix of the population today, an 8 percent figure back then might map into a 9 percent or 10 percent figure today. If thats the case, obviously the task is a bit more daunting.  But the bottom line is, we simply do not know how older households are going to react to the wealth losses that theyve experienced in terms of how much theyre going to raise their saving rate, whether theyre going to delay their retirement, whether theyll have the opportunity to delay 
 their retirement and keep their jobs, and whether theyll accept lower standards of living in retirement.  Its just a huge open question. Some commentators have set the bar much higher.  They argue that the ratio of household debt to income needs to fall back to levels of the mid-1980s.  Thats a very high bar, implying the ratio would have to decline by more than half.  It would suggest that the deleveraging process of households has only just begun and that we have many, many years of deleveraging ahead of us. I think thats a bit too pessimistic a view for several reasons.  Over time, the cost of financial intermediation has fallen; that implies to me a higher debt-to-incomeincome ratio, as well.  Second, some of the changes in tax policy do encourage you to hold more assets and more liabilities; for example, earlier, you might have paid off your mortgage, and now you refinance your mortgage and instead fund your 401(k) plan.  In that case your assets and liabilities are both higher now relative to your income, but you are not worse off.  I expect well see some further decline in the household debt-to-income ratio, but because I think the longer-term secular trend has been upward, I dont think were going to need to see decades-long household deleveraging. At least I hope not. Of course, the difficulty in deleveraging will depend on the inflation outlook.  I think thats important.  If we do fall into a debtdeflation dynamic, then, as income drops, real debt burdens will increase, and it will become even more difficult for households to deleverage even if they want to. So that just underscores why we need to do everything we can to minimize the risk of a deflation outcome.  The second key issue is, of course, the stability of the financial system.  Without this, I dont think we can have a sustainable recovery.  Yes, the economy could improve a little bit during the second half of 2009, but if we dont fix the financial system and its ability to intermediate between savers and borrowers, I suspect 2010 will be very disappointing.  
   This is why the downside risks to the forecast still are predominant in our views at the New York Fed. The FOMC and the Board should concentrate on taking whatever steps are needed to improve market functioning and the viability of the large banks, which lie at the core of the financial system.  This implies expansion of our liquidity programs, such as the TALF, and, at minimum, increased purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities.  It also implies support for the Treasurys CAP, which is designed to get additional capital into the banking system, as well as a willingness to extend our suite of 13(3) activities and our foreign exchange swap programs.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with the general sentiments around the table. The economy is falling further and faster than we thought it would.  We see some signs of stability, as President Plosser pointed out, in consumption and even in housing, but these are very tentative and at a very low level; I think even if household spending were to level out and get a little boost from fiscal policy in coming quarters, the economy would continue to fall further, at least for a little while.  Business investment is very weak and will continue to decline in response to previous downshifts in sales through the multiplier-accelerator effects and in response to tight credit and very constrained credit availability.  I was surprised in looking at the investment chart in Greenbook Part 2 to see that the cost of credit has actually risen substantially for businesses at a time when thats obviously counterproductive. Global demand shows no signs of stabilizing and will continue to depress exports, as Steve was telling us, especially in light of the stronger dollar, which just adds further downward pressure there. To me, perhaps the most troubling developments have been in the financial sector.  Maybe thats because Im spending my days and nights worrying about them.  There has been a 
 tightening of financial conditions over the intermeeting period, even as the economy has weakened: The dollar has increased, equity markets have fallen, and interest rates, including the risk-free rate, have risen in recent weeks.  I think theres a growing lack of confidence in financial institutions.  This is not just a U.S. phenomenon, its a global phenomenal; Trishs chart showed increases in CDS spreads everywhereEurope, U.K., U.S., Asiaeverywhere.  I think the recession is spreading more and more into the loan books of these banks globally, and thats undermining confidence, despite government efforts everywhere to try to shore up confidence. We used to talk about resilience in the economythat was part of President Sterns discussion of why economies bounce backbut I think part of the natural equilibrating mechanisms involves expectations that things will get better, that is, people spend based on that expectation. As President Bullard pointed out, expectations about the future are very depressed, and I agree. Uncertainty is extremely high, and people dont know what to expect, so theyre not taking risks, and thats impeding the bounce-back in the economy.  Governments responses to the difficulties are certainly contributing to this uncertainty.  Again, this is not a U.S. 
phenomenon.  I think governments everywhere are having trouble finding their footing about what to do here. These are very difficult issues without obviously correct answers and responses, and, therefore, you see changes in approaches in various jurisdictions, not just in the U.S. I think weve got a difficult witchs brew here.  Theres populist anger constraining policy options. We need the smartest people in the country in our troubled financial institutions and in our government working on solutions, and were driving them away from both of those institutions every day. I think the set of circumstances implies that improvement in the financial sector is likely to be quite slow and halting, at a minimum.  Lenders and investors are becoming 
  more wary and less confident. Weve got the risk of a further major deterioration in the financial sector, where the failure of several large institutions is a nontrivial risk and could be brought on by government policies. I think the projection of stabilization of demand in the second half and recovery next year is reasonable as fiscal policy kicks in and assuming financial stability, but the downside economic and financial risks are very, very large.  And even if the economy stabilizes in the second half of the year, were starting at a much lower level, with a very high output gap.  So I agree with others who have pointed to the risk of deflation and the interaction of that risk with the high levels of debt in the household sector as a very grave danger going forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me discuss four points:  first, the economy in the near term with an emphasis on non-U.S.; second, medium-term implications of all these policy responses for the trend growth in productivity; third, financial markets; and fourth, briefly, financial institutions. On the economy, the real economy is deteriorating globally, as everyone has said.  I think the hard question is whether the pace of deterioration is slowing, and I suspect the answer is, no, its not.  National capitals, including our own, do not seem to be capable in times like this, for many of the reasons Don has described, of slowing that deterioration.  If anything, some actions seem to be giving rise to more uncertainty and greater weakness.  Dave Stockton talked in detail about the data on spending and production, which continue to be poor, revealing the weakness in our economy and labor markets to be broad and deep.  In the rest of the world, the deterioration, as has been discussed, is probably broader, probably deeper, and, more troubling still, probably 
    even less likely to receive effective responses.  The second-derivative question there is clear.  If anything, the problems overseas are accelerating. The total collapse in global trade is well understood at this point. The hard piece for me to get my arms around is:  What are the second- and third-order effects of this weakness in global markets, in global economies, and what could lead in the near term to significant political, policy, and balance-of-power challenges around the world? Are we entering a period of instability that makes the rest of the worlds economies even more vulnerable than they have been in recent years to exogenous shocks? And I dont think it takes an incredible imagination to think about what those could be.  The unwinding of fiscal imbalances is happening fast, but the deterioration across our economies is happening even 
faster. The delta, I suspect, is a breakdown in confidence and the risk of policy failures which are exacerbating the situation.  Perhaps its true that the current account surplus countries are at greater risk than the deficit countries. The G-20 meetings of this last weekend were, I would say, different in a couple respects from prior international meetings.  For example, six months ago there continued to be a sort of schadenfreude about the U.S., some sense that people think the U.S. is getting what it deserves.  That is nowhere in the room at this point.  There is a worldwide need for U.S. leadership, a need for the U.S. economy to recover with great strength, and a rooting for the U.S.  I think most of the other G-20 members were of the view that if the U.S. does not get this thing turned around, they are going to be in a very dire situation, even more dire than under current prospects.  In addition, I thought that the most interesting topic was what was discussed only in the most hushed tones at these meetings, and that was Eastern Europe.  It was still not allowed to be 
discussed broadly because I think the fears were so, so significant.  Almost every other issue was 
 put squarely on the table for a broad discussion, but the banking problems in Eastern Europe were hidden from public view, and that was more troubling than I had thought even before I went into the meeting. Second, in terms of the medium-term economy here in the U.S., I thought that the adverse supply condition scenario in the Greenbook was quite indicative of more damaging risks.  The misallocation of labor and capital across the economy merits some responsibility for this recession, and getting that allocation back to equilibrium is what recessions are all about.  Its not obvious that is happening, at least at this point.  Capital is not finding its way to anything close to its most efficient uses.  Labor markets are not able to dynamically adjust.  And these problems are likely to be particularly pervasive as the path to a new architecture for credit intermediation remains unclear.  I think over time the real risk is that we are going to end up with less trend productivity, less growth, and a higher NAIRU. Policy actions seem unconducive to restoration of the growth rates that we have come to expect in recent years. Third, let me talk about financial markets.  I think financial market functioning is as poor as Governor Kohn described. Policy uncertainty has become the watchword, not just for the real economy, but for financial markets; and I suspect that when we look at CDS spreads for large financial institutions, notwithstanding the commitments that this institution and the Treasury 
have given, what markets have come to determine is that the Congress will be calling the shots, and that is a problem.  I think markets are very uncertain, when there are 435 leaders in one body and 100 in another, about exactly what might come out of that, and the idea that there might be one party in control of government does not seem to be enough to drive leadership in a single direction. Thus, Im not taking too much signal from the improvement in markets in recent days.  
Backlogs around financings are perhaps better than they were a week or two ago, and, in fact, a 
 large pharmaceutical company last night priced a range of debt securities at impressive spreads.  Im really suspicious about whether a deal like that will be able to be done in the next couple of weeks, and so I think the backlogs are a big question. Let me turn then finally to financial institutions as they relate to financial markets.  I concur wholeheartedly with what President Rosengren said earlier.  I worry very much that the policy response thats going to come from Washington in the next several days and weeks will not be well received, will require another pivot, and there might well be litigation around that.  I think that is very, very damaging.  I think we are entering a period in the next couple of weeks that could well determine the strength in the economy in the next couple of quarters, and I think, as Governor Kohn said, expectations in the real economy are confused because government actions in the name of boldness seem to be quite ambiguous.  That is a very, very difficult combination.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im going to talk again about the banks, and as a reminder, these are the traditional commercial banks, and its a variety of them just below the top four across the country in varying conditions and of different sizes.  Of that group, four are subject to the stress test, and in talking to them this time, Id note that Ive never, ever talked to 
bankers where the conversation was so much about government and so little about the banking business, particularly given what theyre facing right now. With the four banks that are subject to the stress test, I first asked them what the process was, and I got three different answersso they didnt even quite understand what it was they were being asked to do. Two of them were convinced that its a Trojan horse for nationalization.  Several of them questioned whether this test is even going to have credibility in the marketplace 
  once it gets done, thinking its possible that those who are shown to be weak will simply have confirmed suspicions, but those who are shown to be strong will not get any boost in confidence from that.  Also, theres a concern that theyll be at a standstill for the six months that have been given in order to raise private capital, because, even if they passeven if theyre not to get any government capitalif they go out to get private capital, then it looks like they are doing that only to avoid getting the public capital, so basically they cannot go to the capital market.  Private capital is absolutely unwilling to come in until their status is assured and is not willing at this point to be a minority partner with the United States government.  Weve talked a lot about confidence, and one issue is that we have no confidence in our banks ourselves as a government, so its very hard to engender public confidence in those banks. Politics and bonuses, particularly with respect to the original TARP I capital:  That capital now feels completely stigmatized.  Banks thought it would be a sign of strength. The public perception is that theyve been bailed out.  The nondeductible dividend, the political strings attached, and the unknown future combine to make many of them, as President Plosser said, want to give it back. Given the events of this week, I think AIG first nearly took out the financial system and now may make it impossible for us to do any form of financial rescue.  There was a letter from the Special Inspector General for TARP that went to all of the banks.  It 
was a prosecutorial-sounding letter demanding to know exactly what they had done with every dollar that they had received from the government.  They found that almost impossible to respond to, but all of them are working on it. The executive compensation restrictions:  The CEOs are not concerned about their own pay, and theyre not concerned about that of their top lieutenants.  What they are concerned about is their top revenue-producers who are being actively recruited by nonbanks and in some 
   cases larger banks; these people might be in the top 25 in a small bank, but if they go to a larger bank, they would no longer be part of the top 25.  At another bank, the chief of credit is retiring and the CEO does not think that he can find a replacement under the executive compensation restrictions. The rules are unclear.  Theyre still waiting for the Treasury to publish the regulations, and they dont know, for example, what the effective date is.  Some of them wonder whether theyre going to have to take back the 2008 bonuses already paid.  There are questions 
about vesting: If the vesting cannot occur until the TARP money is paid back, does that mean they cannot vest 100 percent, or does that mean they can only partially vest? If they vest 100 
percent once the capital is paid out, what is that going to do to the income statements?  Two of them were deferring their stockholders meeting until the proxy rules became clearer. The removal of requirements for paying the TARP capital back, which was part of the last fiscal recovery plan: Investors already viewed this as temporary, and therefore they were treating it as a loan rather than capitalhence the focus on tangible common equity.  Now its clearly temporary, clearly a loan, and clearly not capital.  One of the banks said that they were getting calls from numerous private equity firms, which they originally would never have talked to, saying, Once you get through the stress test, if you want to give the TARP capital back, we will come in.  Ordinarily they would not have taken it, but now theyre looking at that as an option. The Chairman said in his interview on 60 Minutes that a sign of the economy recovering would be a major institution getting private capitalyou may get that wish.  All but one expressed the absolute desire to repay, and that is what theyre focused on.  The one that was not going to repay is going to put itself in a position to repay and just simply not pay it back until, as he said, the clouds part and the sun shines.  So no banks are willing to leverage it further and 
  get into a position of needing to keep it. So its not doing any good.  It is not performing any function except sitting there as a standby. Capital stories: One bank was contacted by anotherboth were fairly good-sized banks and they talked for a good amount of time.  It was a good strategic fit.  There was no issue with price. There were no social issues.  However, it required additional capital, and they turned it down. Another one had been in detailed talks with the FDIC about taking over a problem bank.  The deal included taking additional TARP in order to make the deal work.  They notified the FDIC that they were standing down; they no longer wanted to have anything to do with that.  And finally, a bank that had not taken any of the government capital had sold trust preferred and common with just a few phone calls last year. This year, the only buyers are the nonpublic investors, because theyre worried about mark to market and OTTI, and they will not invest if TARP capital is present.  Now the trust preferred will be priced at 11 to 12 percent fixed with warrants; last year that price was LIBOR plus 375. The bottom line is that the political and public perception right now precludes the use of government capital for healthy banks, and the presence of public capital has put private capital further out of reach. All of that being said, I still believe, when we look back on this episode, we will determine that the injection of capital into the banks kept us from a meltdown.  But well also conclude that the public outcry forced the capital back out again.  My most optimistic projection is that it will be replaced sooner than anticipated with internal and private sources and that banks will then learn to work with the capital thats available to them. In terms of the FDIC, the restriction and higher fees for issuance of the TLGP are causing banks to speed up issuance. They originally thought they had a period of time, and the 
investment bankers were feeding these issues out in sort of a measured way.  Now they all feel 
     like they have to issue before April 1, before the price goes up.  Banks did not see the FDIC increase in the premiums and the special assessment coming.  Most of them, of course, believe that theyre paying for the bailouts of large banks in some way, and it wipes out a significant portion, if not all, of quarterly earnings. Now to the bankruptcy cram-down for prime, jumbo, and all types of securitizations:  The bankruptcy cram-down will alter the order of payments, so that the losses are then shared equally by all tranches rather than in order. This is going to further reduce the value of triple-A tranches of those, and the staff estimates thats a market of about $600 billion in securities. The Federal Home Loan Banks:  The Seattle bank became the first to exhaust its retained earnings. Theyre primarily mark-to-market losses, and its making the case that theyre not real losses. But the question is: What does this mean for valuation of the stock that the banks hold? Stock ownership is a requirement for borrowing, so anybody whos borrowing from Federal Home Loan Banks also owns that stock.  The advances are getting significantly more expensive.  This is not an issue just for small banksthe top 10 banks have 20 percent of the advances from Federal Home Loan Banks.  Bankers banks and corporate credit unions, I think, pose similar risks for smaller institutions. Fair value accounting is still the number one concern in the industry.  I would look to see what happens with the impact of the revised standards on the first quarter.  That could be very helpful, although banks that took big losses in the fourth quarter dont get to reverse them. Lets switch just a minute now and talk about whats actually going on in the banking book. Deposits are growing, in some cases significantly.  Transactions, as consumers change their behavior, are down significantly, as are overdrafts.  In the loan area, demand is down sharply. Consumer and small business applications are up a bit, but the approval rates are down 
  about 10 percent, as you said. In terms of home equity loans, the reasons for the denials are primarily issues with debt-to-income ratios and appraisals.  One thing that consumer groups in here in last week reminded me ofwhich I had forgotten and shouldnt haveis that home equity is a primary funding source for small businesses, not SBA loans.  We tend to look at home equity as a consumer loan, but it is really small business financing.  In terms of business loans, they are down from lack of income and in many cases actually outright losses. In the construction loan area, they are still working through the existing residential construction loans and dealing with lots and lots of lots.  Theres not much new commercial constructionits primarily medical or educational facilities.  And there is no takeout for completed construction.  Some banks are pulling away from loan products, segments, industries, or geographic areas. Others are taking the best of the deals and underwriting them individually.  For example, if somebody says, Im getting out of all deals to a given segment, a smaller bank will come in and underwrite them individually and take the best of those deals.  Those are the ones that are growing their loans. Student loans: They were already low margin due to a mismatch in reference rates.  The banks are currently doing more volume than they want, and they seem delighted to hear that the federal budget is taking them out of the student loan business. Mortgages: The application volume slowed when rates picked up, and its still primarily refinancings. Loan modifications:  The GSE and service portfolios were modified, but they are concerned about the long-term effect of the very low rates with the ceiling for their own book. Credit quality: Delinquencies continue to rise.  Theyre starting to sell properties at the same rate theyre bringing in new ones.  The growth in loans that are ninety days past due are 
  primarily loans that are in the process of modification.  The commercial loans are the ones showing real trouble right now, and as I said yesterday, commercial real estate loans are really just business loans. The repayment and the collateral value of those loans depend on the business cash flows, and the appraisals right now are stunningly low.  Many retail stores are 
closing. Others are on percentage rent, so that cash flows do drop with sales.  Some centers are 
one tenant away from disaster.  Hospitality is suffering from not only the recession but the 
stigma.  In Hawaii they are having $10 million a week in cancellations. The banks, though, are not foreclosing. In this case, they are modifying, offering reduced payments, and putting on nonaccrual as long as the operator will continue to operate, because they dont want those properties back. Some banks are actually incentivizing their loan officers to move loans out rather than to bring loans in.  Some banks are offering to settle performing loans at a discount in order to get them off the books.  One bank is considering making jumbo loans at conforming rates on its own books to diversify its borrower risk and reduce the inventory of construction loans. With the residential construction loans, you almost get an impression of a store thats getting ready to go out of business and hasnt been able to buy new inventory: The inventory they have is not the inventory thats selling, and its just sitting there on the shelves. In terms of auto loans, there are lower losses on cars that are coming off lease.  The wholesale inventories are firming up, and I think that would show through to new cars by the third quarter. Rental agencies are trimming their fleets by about 20 percent. Dealers cant sell, so they are looking to manufacturers to repurchase the inventory.  A Lexus dealer said he has customers who normally would buy on a regular basis and can afford to buy, but are worried about the appearance of buying in a situation where people are losing their jobs. 
  The boat inventory is aging. Its now three years old, and G.E. Capital is the only company financing boats. Borrowers do not expect to have to pay.  One CEO was at his neighbors house, which she had just purchased for $1.6 million.  The neighbor showed the improvements that she was making and then asked who the modification officer at the bank was because she wanted to 
modify the mortgage on her vacation home.  Another CEO had a private banking client come in who had purchased a home with a private banking loan for $2 million in 2005.  The loan was interest only for a million and a half.  At one point, the client got a $3 million offer and turned it 
down. Now the property is for sale at $1 million, and the client said he would continue to make the payments if they reduced the loan to $750,000. Theres a huge increase in fraud.  Floor plan and wire transfer were the two that were mentioned. In summary, right now Im really not hearing much about bank-specific issues that are impediments to lending.  Deposits are high. Government liquidity is cheap and plentiful.  The primary reasons for not lending are related to creditworthiness and concern about economic conditions and collateral values. Banks are reducing credit line availability, but it is due to concerns about credit and collateral.  Loans are difficult for larger amounts, for credit-only customers, for those with high debt-to-income ratios or weak credit histories, for those who have little equity, and for any construction loan.  Finally, theres sticker shock.  I dont think the banks will ever go back to lending at the spreads typical before this episode, so many of those who 
think that they cant get credit are concerned more about the cost of credit, and I think those high loan spreads are here to stay. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
 MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Not surprisingly, my assessment of the economy and the financial sector converges with those that have already been expressed.  So let me just quickly make a few additional observations that support the hypothesis of an even longer period for stabilization and recovery than reflected in the Greenbook forecast and, thus, even greater vulnerability for the economy for some time to come. I begin with an admittedly speculative point about the domestic labor market, but one that complements some earlier comments by Presidents Yellen and Evans.  It appears to me that an unusual number of industries will be undergoing major structural adjustments during the course of this downturn and, as a result, may not rehire at the rate that might be expected in a cyclical rebound. These industries are two groups. One consists of industries like construction and financial services that were directly involved in the asset bubbles associated with the financial crisis. It seems likely that overcapacity in those industries so far exceeded sustainable demand 
that the post-recession employment profile will be substantially, rather than just moderately, below pre-crisis levels. A second group consists of industries that, even in the middle part of the decade, had seen significant pressure on their business models.  Companies and sectors as diverse as autos, media, legal services, and retail were already in the process of consolidation and/or downsizing. This process has clearly accelerated under the weight of the contraction in real GDP. There are good reasonsanecdotal, I admit, but good reasons, nonethelessto believe that, to a greater or lesser degree, each of these industries will emerge from this recession permanently leaner than they were, and some may be fundamentally changed.  This observation is, as I noted, to date unsupported by even raw data, much less by systematic comparison with earlier severe recessions.  But if my intuition is buttressed by such an analysis, elevated unemployment levels may be stickier for a longer time than we now anticipate.  The emergence 
  of new firms and industries that might normally be expected to pick up some of the slack will, at the same time, be hindered by continuing dysfunction in financial markets. I have some very different observations about the international economy, but, Im afraid, with similar implications for the shape of the GDP growth curve.  The downward revisions of economic performance abroad do not seem to have been met with a sense of policy urgency in 
many countries, particularly with respect to non-monetary policy measures in the advanced foreign economies.  Indeed, my conclusion from my week in Europe was not dissimilar to that of Governor Warsh. I observed, in addition, that there has been a kind of collective decision among policymakers to put on a relatively happy face publicly, while being unable privately to offer any grounds for optimism.  In formal comments and public utterances, a number of policymakers made reference to wholly adequate stimulus measures.  They discounted the significance of increased bank CDS spreads, or, in at least one case, commented on the wonderful bargains 
available to those who still had jobs.  This attitude is of particular concern because, as Steve Kamin mentioned, the effects of stimulus measures in many advanced foreign economies are 
substantially front-loaded into 2009. Whether because of policy paralysis in the face of daunting challenges or, in some cases, because of the weak political circumstances of incumbent governments, too many countries seem unable or unwilling to elevate their responses to rapidly deteriorating conditions.  I worry that a similar hesitancy to take forceful steps could lead to inadequate responses to contingencies, such as widespread banking problems in emerging markets. An absence of confidence in the political strength of the government can also push officials towards more serious consideration of measures, such as shifts in foreign exchange policies, which may relieve a certain amount of domestic pain by shifting it elsewhere in a neutral or even negative-sum fashion. 
 My concerns about this issue have increased dramatically in the last week.  Many emerging markets have limited capacity to help themselves, given their own fiscal and monetary constraints. One major exception, of course, is China.  Yet even China seems to be relying in the medium term on a rebound in advanced foreign economies that would restore many of the exports lost in recent months.  While that approach worked well for countries coming out of the Asian financial crisis in 1999, it was built on the strength of largely unaffected American and European economies.  Obviously, demand in our economies will be weak for quite some time.  Moreover, the continued problems in our financial sectors imply that capital flows to emerging markets are unlikely to pick up, as they did following the Asian financial crisis. Despite these impediments to a reasonably fast-paced return to conditions promoting rapid emerging market growth, theres little indication in China or elsewhere that policymakers have used the crisis to accelerate shifts in their own growth models away from a high level of export dependence. Coupled with what is, at least for the present, a somewhat passive policy instinct in some advanced economies, international developments may, like our domestic employment situation, suggest a more prolonged and shaky recovery period.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I understand coffee is ready. Why dont we take a 20-minute break? [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me start by trying to summarize the discussion around the table, and then Ill give a few additional comments.  The group agreed that the economic outlook has worsened significantly, and although it wasnt noted, we have seen very sharp declines in both the fourth and the first quarters. The slowdown is widespread across sectors and 
 has included not only such areas as construction, manufacturing, and retail, but also hospitality, shipping, and to some extent energy, agriculture, and other areas.  A notable development has been declines abroad, which have been exceptionally severe, and which, together with the stronger dollar, are hurting U.S. exports. There was a view on the part of some that there might be some stabilization later this year.  Factors that might promote a weak recovery later this year or in 2010 include fiscal policy, monetary stimulus, improvements of financial markets, slower declines in housing, and working out of the inventory cycle.  However, I have to say that there wasnt much conviction behind this view, and some saw at best an L-shaped recovery. Risks clearly remain to the downside, and a protracted period of economic weakness remains a significant possibility, reflecting factors such as an ongoing lack of confidence in government policy, general uncertainty, need for economic restructuring, and the ongoing deleveraging process by both financial institutions and households.  International prospects may not be much better, as other countries also face needs for restructuring and many are having inadequate policy responses. Consumption data improved slightly in January and February, but consumption fundamentals remain quite weak.  Declines in wealth have been sharp and have led consumers to attempt to repair balance sheets by increasing their saving.  The labor market is shedding jobs rapidly, and substantial job losses may continue for a while.  Fiscal stimulus was mentioned.  Housing starts and permits have increased a bit, and the Administrations 
foreclosure mitigation plan may also be of some help in the housing market.  Nevertheless, housing continues to disappoint to the downside in general, and house prices continue to fall.  It was noted that declines in house prices affect not only the rates of residential construction but also consumer wealth, as well as the quality of assets that are held by financial institutions. 
 In the financial sector, many credit markets, especially those in which the Fed has intervened, remained fairly stable in the intermeeting period, despite worsening economic news, and some highly rated corporations have issued debt.  However, confidence in the banking system has deteriorated, as reflected, for example, in widening CDS spreads.  Lending is down, reflecting in part credit supply constraints, as well as lower loan demand and bank concerns about credit quality and about the economy in general.  Participants remain concerned about the effects of lack of financing on the commercial real estate sector in particular.  The success of government actions to stabilize the banking system remains an important factor in the outlook.  Theres a great deal of public skepticism about government efforts in this regard, as well as populist reaction. Industrial production has fallen sharply both here and abroad as global trade declines.  Managers remain pessimistic and uncertain about prospects for sales, prices, and employment and are prepared to cut employment and investment further if improvement does not materialize.  Demand for new capital goods remains weak, as capacity utilization has set a postwar low.  Credit constraints are perceived to be an important problem. Most participants expect inflation to remain very low for a time, and some are concerned about the risk for deflation, including falling wages.  Deflationary trends could result in a deflation trap or a debtdeflation dynamic.  Expectations of inflation, but also general economic conditions, will clearly play an important role going forward. Those are some of the things I took away from the discussionIm sure I left out many points. Are there any comments? [No response] Let me just add a bit to that.  I dont have a great deal to say.  As everyone noted, the intermeeting news was generally disappointingbelow expectations.  Its notable that in 
 December we thought things were bad enough to cut rates to zero, and in the last two meetings the changes in the outlook both times have been quite negative.  In particular, like the rest of the world, the U.S. economy experienced very sharp declines in the fourth quarter and apparently now in the first quarter. Perhaps the most striking development since the last meeting is the weakening of the global economy.  Its really quite remarkable how quickly that happened.  Many of you have experienced being abroad and hearing people say that on Tuesday things looked okay and on Thursday a sudden chill hit the atmosphere and theres been a tremendous decline since then.  I think one interpretation of the worsening of our outlook is that, in fact, the shock that hit the world economy in September and October was a truly enormous shock and that we have been slow in understanding how big it was and how persistent it was.  So, in some sense, its not that weve had new shocks, but rather that we are just coming to the point of understanding how bad that shock was. There were, of course, a few glimmers of positive news, and President Stern and others made note of that.  There were some indications of stabilization in consumption in January and February, and that is before the actual fiscal stimulus kicks in, which may be of some help unless you think people are anticipating it, which is possible.  That seemed to happen last spring actually. Also, we saw a bit of improvement in the housing starts and the permits yesterday.  So theres a little good news there, but, like most people, I wouldnt want to take too much of a signal from that.  First of all, both of these data sets are very volatile month to month, and they suffer from a great deal of seasonality and other factors.  But more importantly, given the size of the shock that the world economy apparently was hit with in the fall, theres going to be an 
  unavoidable cyclical dynamic thats just going to have to work its way out.  Theres almost nothing that can be done at this point to avoid it. In particular, consumer spending may stabilize, but its going to be facing very substantial headwinds, including the familiar list of further stock price declines, house price declines, ongoing job losses, confidence declines, and the same factors that weve talked about.  Id reiterate also the point that the Vice Chairman made about the saving rate.  We have a recent reading of about 5 percent in the household saving rate.  That was possibly, to some extent, 
exaggerated by temporary increases in income.  If the consumer wants to maintain that saving rate or go higher, it suggests a relatively weak consumption profile going forward. Moreover, even if consumption stabilizes, the rest of the dynamic is still very powerful.  Inventories, for examplethe inventory profile looks worse than it did at the last meeting, in the sense that the overhang seems to be greater than we thought it might have been and, therefore, the cycle will take longer to work its way through.  I talked about this at the last meeting.  At the last meeting we had inventory dynamics leading possibly to slightly positive economic growth by the third quarter. Those dynamics now look distinctly less favorable.  Inventory investment is likely to be negative throughout the rest of the year.  It may add to growth in the sense it will be less negative going forward, but, certainly, that dynamic is going to be a very powerful one for some time. The other dynamics that have been talked about around the table include investment.  We could hardly expect strong investment in the context of declining output, a postwar low in capacity utilization, credit constraints, uncertainty, et cetera.  With investment continuing to be quite weak, final sales will be weak, and therefore, the inventory dynamic will be stretched out.  Theres also, of course, an employment dynamic to the extent that the employment levels are 
   above the sustainable levels from the perspective of individual firms.  As the continued economic weakness is perceived, well see further job losses and further dynamic adjustment. I would reiterate the importance of the global decline.  Steve talked about the implications for contributions to GDP of the swing in exports from early last year until now, and there obviously is not going to be major change in that in the near term. And finally, there was a lot of discussion around the table, which I would reiterate, about financial conditions. There is some improvement, or at least some stabilization, in some credit markets.  I think that were certainly better off than we were at the beginning of the shock in September and October, but banks are under exceptional stress.  The CDS spreads were mentioned.  The political situation is very adverse in terms of ensuring that the government will have the resources and support to take the necessary action to get the banking system stabilized.  Thinking about the alternative simulations in the Greenbook, I think delayed financial repair might well be one that we would want to consider.  The experience of other countries and other episodes is that that leads, at best, to a period of stagnation, if not to further decline. I dont want to be completely bleak.  Like others, I saw a few positive signs.  Theres some indication that the free fall of the fourth quarter and first quarter might be moderating to some extent, particularly in consumer spending.  If thats so and if fears of a depression or some extreme event begin to wane, we may see some stabilization of final demand, which then will feed into the inventory and investment dynamic over time.  But under any circumstances, and particularly if the banking situation is not resolved in a favorable way, I think we can expect to see very large output gaps develop and a very sustained, weak condition for the economy. 
                                                           5 Materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this document (appendix 5). That obviously has implications for inflation.  As I mentioned last time, deflation per se is not necessarily the issue.  The fact is that, as disinflation progresses, that itself will raise real interest rates and exacerbate to some extent the debt issues and the housing-valuation issues. So putting that all together, as many people discussed yesterday, I do think that some aggressive policies may be called for today, and with that Ill stop and turn to Brian to introduce the policy round. MR. MADIGAN.5 As indicated by the Greenbook and by your discussion this morning, the economic outlook has deteriorated markedly over the intermeeting period. At the same time, the options for applying additional stimulus quickly appear limited.  It now seems likely that the TALF will lift off only slowly.  And prospects for the enactment of additional fiscal stimulus, at least in the near term, appear dim. In these circumstances, consideration of further monetary stimulus through large-scale asset purchases would seem to be warranted.  The Bluebook presented two policy alternatives, A and B, that involved additional asset purchases and one, alternative C, that would not involve further stimulative measures.  I will focus my remarks this morning on alternatives A and B.  This morning, we have proposed 
revisions to the draft statements; the revised statements are provided in the package that was distributed to you earlier labeled Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary 
Policy Alternatives. I will begin with alternative A, on page 2.  Under this alternative, the rationale sectionparagraphs 1 and 2would note that the economy is undergoing a severe contraction and that the near-term economic outlook has worsened.  It would point to a number of indicators of the economic weakness.  Paragraph 1 would end on a note of some optimism by stating that the policy actions taken to stabilize financial markets and institutions, together with fiscal and monetary stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth.  Paragraph 2 would note the Committees expectation that inflation will remain subdued, dropping the phrase in coming quarters that was used in the January statement, consistent with a view that inflation could be low for some time.  Indeed, it would again cite some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term.  As President Fisher noted, the rationale section 
provides a rather downbeat reading on the economy, but perhaps one that is realistic. In the policy paragraph, alternative A would again indicate the Committees intention to employ all available tools.  It says that the Committee will hold the 
federal funds rate range at 0 to  percent and indicates an expectation that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. This phrase would suggest a longer interval than the phrase for 
        some time used in January and suggested for alternative B.  To provide additional economic stimulus, the Committee would take three policy actions under alternative A: increasing the amount of its agency MBS purchases by $500 billion to a total of $1 trillion this year; increasing the amount of its purchases of agency debt securities by $100 billion to a total of $200 billion this year (the boost to agency debt purchases is an addition relative to the alternative presented in the Bluebook); and initiating purchases of longer-term Treasury securities that are to total $300 billion over the next six months. This paragraph would also note that the TALF has been launched.  The statement would conclude by indicating that the Committee will be carefully monitoring the Systems balance sheet and by suggesting some predilection toward stepping up its 
balance sheet expansion by noting that it will be assessing whether a faster pace of asset purchases would be helpful in improving credit market conditions and supporting economic activity.  A possible downside of including such language is 
that it suggests a possible course of action that the Committee may end up not 
pursuing. Alternative B, on the next page, begins with a rationale section, paragraphs 1 and 2, that is identical to that proposed for alternative A.  However, under alternative B, the Committee would not initiate purchases of Treasury securities.  Rather, it would more than double its purchases of agency MBS securities, to a total of $1.25 trillion this year, and double its purchases of agency debt securities to $200 billion.  This alternative would not include anything comparable with the final clause of alternative A indicating that the Committee was inclined to further step up its asset purchases. In summary, alternative A would constitute a somewhat more aggressive expansion of the FOMCs asset purchases than alternative B.  The differences in terms of total asset purchases are small:  Alternative A would commit to an expansion 
of your asset purchases by a total of $900 billion, whereas the increase under alternative B would be just slightly less, at $850 billion.  However, as I noted, the language of alternative A would be more forward-leaning with respect to possible future increases in asset purchases.  And the initiation of Treasury purchases might suggest to market participants that the Committees operations could be expanded particularly in that direction in the future. The key difference between alternative A and alternative B really is whether or not to purchase Treasury securities.  To review the arguments for and against such 
purchases, you might be inclined to proceed with purchases of longer-term Treasury securities if you: believe that the economic situation had deteriorated so substantially that you did want to apply all available tools as indicated in your previous statement; feel that it might be helpful to diversify the tools that you are applying to the situation; believe that purchasing Treasury securities rather than private securities is preferable to minimize the Federal Reserves involvement in credit allocation; or think it might be easier to unwind in the future holdings of Treasury securities than 
        
  holdings of private securities such as MBS, which might be less liquid or might be seen in the future as tied particularly to primary mortgage market conditions. On the other hand, you might be inclined not to purchase longer-term Treasury securities if: you think that purchases of private securities such as MBS would more effectively improve conditions in private credit markets and thus provide better support to private spending; or you are concerned that market participants might believe that you are monetizing the federal debt, a perception that might lead to adverse effects on term premiums or, perhaps, on inflation expectations. Under alternative C, page 4, the Committee would make no adjustment to the policy tools that it is already implementing, and it would not reference any modification to the Federal Reserves liquidity programs other than those that have been previously announced.  Instead, the statement would indicate that the Committee decided to keep its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent and indicate that it continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant 
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.  The second paragraph would note that the near-term economic outlook is poor but indicate that the Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in economic activity will begin later this year, subject to significant downside risks.  The final paragraph of the announcement would note the range of policy actions that are already in train. The Bluebook also presented an alternative structure for the FOMC statement, based on a suggestion provided by President Bullard.  Applying that structure to alternative A, and incorporating this mornings suggested revisions to the policy actions, is shown on page 5 as alternative A. A is substantively the same as A, but it reorders the statement such that the Committees actions are presented first.  In particular, the first sentence of the statement indicates that The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet further by purchasing $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months and by acquiring an additional $500 billion of agency MBS and $100 billion of agency debt securities this year. Obviously, this approach gives greater prominence not only to the actions themselves but also to their effect on the Committees balance sheet.  Conversely, this approach gives less prominence to the very downbeat summary of the economic situation in paragraphs 2 and 3, a possible 
advantage of this approach. However, the flow of the statement may be seen as a bit less logical, in that it presents the Committees actions before discussing the 
economic conditions that motivated them. Alternatives B and C, pages 6 and 7, apply the same structure to alternatives B and C. The final three sections of the package provide draft directives for the three basic alternatives and their primed variants. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions?  President Evans. 
  MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, in the Bluebook and yesterday we saw a chart of how the unemployment rate and the inflation rate would play out under these different strategies. My question is about alternative A, the largest program that were considering.  Is it plausible/likely/possible that what were looking at here would be enough?  Would the markets look at this and think that the FOMC has taken actions that it believes, if the outlook doesnt deteriorate further, would be enough? MR. MADIGAN. Youre asking about how the markets would interpret this? MR. EVANS. Is it likely that the Committee would be willing to see this as large enough to put us in a good position and wed just wait for confirmation of the outlook? Are we even close to that? MR. MADIGAN. Judging by the simulations that were presented in the Bluebook, I would say that this alternative A is roughly comparable to the green dash-dotted line on page 32, if you happen to have that in front of you.  Its roughly the same size, with a slightly different composition.  So the effects on interest rates might be similar.  Of course, that would not get the Committee, on this analysis, to something comparable to the unconstrained policy. MR. EVANS. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-handed intervention? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. A quick question: The directives have up to, and the statements do not have up to.  Is that important? Is that intentional? MR. MADIGAN. No, thats not intentional.  Thank you. We should correct it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A question from President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. May I just ask, Mr. Chairman, a question of Ms. Mosser? Every one of these statements says that weve launched the term asset-backed securities loan facility.  Could 
  you just give us a quick update of where we stand on that, because the wording here might be questioned? MS. MOSSER. Because the deadline is tomorrow, not surprisingly, we have no one who has signed on the dotted line. We have, however, three very serious issuestwo of them auto-related, one of them credit card-relatedthat appear at this stage pretty likely to go through.  There do seem to be at least enough customer-to-dealer contracts signed, or in the process of being signed. My ballpark guesstimate, based on the numbers Ive seen, is $5 billioncould be $8 billiontotal. Quite frankly, before the machinations of the last week and a half, I dont think we truly anticipated more than $5 to $10 billion in the first subscription.  Theres been no price discovery in this market for several months.  And just on those grounds alone, many issuers and investors might be somewhat reluctant to be first in the TALF. MR. FISHER. So we cant say it has launched. MS. MOSSER. Well, weve launched it in the sense that the subscription is open and that lending has happened. MR. FISHER. All right. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there other questions? Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  I just want to make sure my math is correct and my understanding is correct. When we do the additional $500 billion in mortgage-backed securities, does that increase the pace at which we buy them, or does it extend the time from June until the end of the 
year? MS. MOSSER. The $500 billion would largely extend the buying through the end of the year. If the Committee has a preference that those be front-loaded, that would be possible for us to do from an operational standpoint.  As a matter of fact, if the Committee would be interested 
 in giving us direction on that, wed be happy to take it.  Honestly, the additional $500 billion would not be a huge surprise to the market.  I think the expectation of most is that $500 billion at the same pace through the end of the year is a likely outcome of todays meeting. MS. DUKE.  Under alternative A, by my count its $500 billion in MBS, $300 billion in Treasuries, and $100 billion in agencies, for a total of $900 billion.  Would we expect that to 
have a similar result as in the note on $1 trillion in a combination of mortgage-backed securities and Treasuries?  Is that the result we would be looking for from alternative A? MR. MADIGAN. I think we consider it to be roughly the same.  Our ability to discriminate between effects on one market or another is pretty limited.  Theres lots of uncertainty around these estimates. MS. DUKE.  For alternative Bwhich is $750 billion plus $100 billion, I get $850 billion. Would we also expect that to have similar impact? In other words, would the fact that theres no Treasury component matter? MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Given our ability to distinguish between them, we wouldnt be able to say that that made a material difference from any other one. MS. DUKE. Okay. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There was a two-hander from President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Yes, just a clarification.  It would seem that, if the goal is to push rates down and cause a wave of refinancing, then wed want to be doing the bulk of the purchasing during the period where the refinancing would occur, which presumably would be over the next quarter. If everybody refinances over the next quarter or two, the ability to purchase new mortgages in the second half of the year would probably be pretty limited, if were actually successful in doing it. It does seem that the goal is not to have an even flow over the 
   course of the year, but to enable rates to get low enough that we facilitate a wave of refinancings and new home purchases.  So I think it would be good if we can provide some clarification that the goal is not to spread it out, but to push the rates down and get the refinancings going, which would imply front-loading, assuming the program is successful. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you think the front-loading is more important than the announcement effect? MR. ROSENGREN. I wouldnt want to be constrained to do only a limited amount and have the refinancings cause rates not to go down very much. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You dont necessarily want to save the $500 billion for the second half of the year is what youre saying? MR. ROSENGREN. Right. If its appropriate, Id rather do it sooner than later.  I want to get as much bang for the buck in the next two quarters as we can. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Can we find a phrase that would be added that would say something like with the greater portion to be done in the first? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Over the next several months. MR. WARSH.  Increasing the rate of purchases.  I think thats what you are trying to get the markets to gather. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Except its a little bit uncertain, because if we front-load it, then later theres less. Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Brian, I just want to make sure I understand the numbers as well, and it comes down to a difference in wording between A and B.  In B, you have increase its purchases of agency debt this year by $100 billion to a total of $200 billion.  In A, it just says, boost its 
purchases and now anticipates purchasing $200 billion.  I guess that makes the headline 
  number in alternative A $1 trillion.  But, if I understand correctly, its really an additional $900 billion of authorized purchases. Is that right? MR. MADIGAN. Thats correct. MR. TARULLO. Okay. Im just curious.  Why is the alternative A today $100 billion less than the alternative A in the Bluebook, which was $500 billion additional MBS and $500 billion Treasuries? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Could I interject something here for just a moment?  As I asked yesterday, everyone gave their views, and I listened very carefully to what the options were. What was suggested here today was two approaches.  One expanded on the MBS front, going from $1 trillion for this year to $1 trillion, with a concomitant small increase in agency debt, but no Treasuries. The other approach was to maintain the same pace of MBS purchases 
through the second half of the yearsubject to a bit of language about timing, in response to the point that was raisedand to open a new front on the Treasuries side; there I was responding to concerns that a number of people raised about monetization and the independence perception, and so on, trying to make it seem more like a step into this arena rather than a big-scale, new intervention. So that was the thinking on those two approaches. Let me now add, having heard the discussion around the table today, I think I would like to raise a third option, which is the union of the two, which would be the $750 billion of MBS, plus the $300 billion of Treasuries. Id be open to that as well. Im trying to avoid the proliferation of too many alternatives, but what I heard today suggests that some people at least might be interested in yet a more aggressive approach, while still attentive to the costs and benefits of expanding our balance sheet faster and further.  Do I have clarity on sort of what the options are now? 
    MR. TARULLO. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Any other questions for Brian?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. My question is actually for Ms. Mosser.  If we adopted either B or the schedule that the Chairman suggested, and you were to pace it the way you would, what are the chances that the monetary base will shrink in the next intermeeting period? Youve got the TAF, CPFF, AMLF, and foreign exchange swap lines. Is there a significant chance that you wont make enough purchases in the intermeeting period to offset other declines in our assets and leave the monetary base shrunken rather than expanded over the period? MS. MOSSER. If we accelerate, particularly on the mortgage side, and front-load those, I would view it as very unlikely. Spence probably has a better feel on the liquidity programs.  A little shrinkage there might occur, but, particularly if we add Treasuries and we are more 
aggressive on the mortgage side, I would view it as very unlikely that the base would shrink. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You have this one question of the settlement of mortgage securities, though, which might not actually occur by then.  MR. HILTON. You really have to look at what the settlement date is almost. MS. MOSSER. Yes, thats right.  In thinking about the base, because the settlements are so lumpy we probably have to switch a week forward and note that even though the base might shrink one week, it will jump up a lot the next when all of the MBS settle. MR. LACKER. Do you think the base is likely to increase? Would that be your expectation? MS. MOSSER. Yes. 
MR. LACKER. A couple hundred billion, would you guess? 
 MR. HILTON. Its not a long intermeeting period, so a couple hundred billion might be a little bit larger than is realistic.  It is hard to anticipate where the liquidity facilities are going, but the fact that they have been relatively stable on balance for a couple of monthssince late Januarymakes me think that, without some fundamental change in liquidity conditions, theyre probably not going to break in a substantial way one direction or another. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Im sorry, if I could just add a point.  With the CPFF, you had this big refinancing wave that happened late January.  Youre not going to have another one until late April, and theres going to be less coming due at that time. So thats probably not going to change dramatically.  The big question is on the foreign exchange swap side.  But that has already come down a lot. MR. LACKER. The current size is around 400 or 500 billion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 450. 
MS. MOSSER. I think I can say with some confidence that, if we buy a lot of mortgages, by the middle of May its very unlikely that the monetary base will be shrinking, and it will grow fairly aggressively, because the big settlements in mortgage-backed securities tend to happen in the middle of the month. MR. LACKER. Just to pursue this a little more, whats sketched out here is $1 trillion of increases in our assets above what they otherwise would be.  If we were interested in assuring that a certain portion of that passed through to the base, that might call for even more offsetting increases. Let me ask something operational.  If we wanted to be sure that the base expanded, or that it expanded by a certain amount, could you vary Treasury purchases within the intermeeting 
 period in a way that would react to incoming information on the foreign exchange swap usage, and the like, to achieve that? MS. MOSSER. Yes. I think there might be better tools for doing that, though.  Honestly, if that were the guidance given, we would probably go back to doing repos. MR. HILTON. We can do repos.  The other element is our involvement in the dollar roll market as well, which we probably could scale up at a relatively fast pace, if we wanted to.  Again, though, we would have to look at the calendar, because those also settle on a discrete date. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, President Lacker, just to reiterate the options quickly:  The all MBS option would be $850 billionthats $750 billion plus $100 billion.  What I will call the Treasury option is $900 billionthats $500 billion MBS plus $100 billion agency 
debt plus $300 billion Treasuries. The combined option is $1.15 trillionthats $750 billion MBS, $100 billion debt, and $300 billion Treasuries.  My reaction to your question is that, particularly if we front-load the MBS, even though there might be some weekly variation in the base, the very strong trend of the base will be clearly up for the rest of the year. This will certainly make it very clear to everybody that thats the intention, and that will be the result. MR. LACKER. Well, you understand my concern.  There is $1 trillion on our balance sheet that is demand-driven and could roll off in very uncertain circumstances.  Im not quite sure whether that will happen or not.  So you can understand why this leaves a fair amount of uncertainty about where the base is going to be at the end of the year. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It would all have to roll off.  It certainly would be very unlikely, but okay. Anyone else have a question for Brian? [No response.] Just in terms of parameters, we have the three substantive options.  I want to remind you that there are also two statement options.  One is more similar to what weve had before, which states the economic situation first, and then goes through the paragraph on policy actions.  We also have proposed an alternative suggested by some comments that President Bullard made that in some ways would be analogous to our old structure in that it would put the policy actions first.  For the sake of convenience, lets call that the inverted structurewithout any derogation implied.  So let me now go to President Plosser, if youre ready. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I raised some issues yesterday about asset purchases and policy. I think some of the things that remain questions for our policies going forward include, for example: How do we evaluate the merits of the various programs we have? What are the tradeoffs?  Which ones work best? Which ones dont? How do we equate the programs at the margin to get the most bang for the buck as we use our balance sheet? I think a lot of the discussion yesterday about Treasuries versus MBS had a mixed tone to it, in the sense that part of it was a desire to use monetary expansion to support the economy at large, while some people wanted to use the asset purchases for liquidity purposes or to bring mortgage rates down or to target credit market interventions in certain markets.  Certainly, part of the debate about whether to use Treasuries or MBS depended on which side of that fence you were on. So I think we still have some work to do about deciding the policy mix. But Im going to throw a monkey wrench in the works.  Yesterday the Chairman asked for alternative ways of saying some of this.  One of the issues we discussed, and it came out, I think, loud and clear, was that theres a lot of concern about the path of policy.  When we 
                                                         announce policy actionswhether they be the TALF, MBS, or what have youwe tend to announce them as quantities.  As a result, its not very clear what happens when that quantity is reached. What happens after that?  What will be the next market?  What will happen going forward?  I think theres an argument that conducting policy in that manner creates a lot of 
uncertainty in the marketplace about whats going to come next.  Are they going to do it again? And, if so, how big would that be?  Another issue when we target specific volumes is that the conditionality of those interventions doesnt come through very clearly.  It may seem that we are going to do the $500 billion no matter what else happens. So President Bullard and IIm going to implicate him as wellwondered, Well, is there another way to do this that might be helpful?  We put together a new version of the statement, with the idea that we want to get beyond just announcing one-off programs that we may or may not do again and move toward thinking about saying that were going to have a plan to increase the size of the balance sheet or increase the size of certain components of the balance sheet over a period of time, and that well adjust those growth rates, if you will, as needed, as the economy either worsens or improves. The proposed wording was passed aroundweve called it alternative B.6 The idea here was to address the question, Okay, how else could we communicate to the markets about what our plan is?  Paragraph 1 basically becomes, The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to continue to increase the Federal Reserve balance sheet through the purchase of agency MBS and Treasury securities.  The Committee expects the growth rate of the MBS and Treasury components of the balance sheet combined to average about 10 percent a month.  The Committee will carefully monitor macroeconomic and financial conditions and adjust this rate of expansion as warranted. 6 The statement distributed by Mr. Plosser is appended to this document (appendix 6). 
   Now, we came up with 10 percent a month.  Basically, that would get us to the $1 trillion over the course of the year, which we were talking about yesterday.  Its ambiguous about whether it ends up being Treasuries or MBS.  It then says we will carefully monitor this expansion at each meeting and adjust it as we deem appropriateif we need to ramp it up, we can do that, and if we want to bring it down, we can bring it down.  The rest of the statement is pretty much the same as the original.  We took the rest of what was paragraph 1 and made it paragraph 2, which is basically a discussion of the TALF and the other programs that weve initiated. So it is the same there, and the rest of the statement basically follows B.  Again, our view is that we were looking for a way to get us out of thinking about one-off programs or volumes of purchases that were going to make, and instead we were trying to set a target or objective for a growth rate of some set of quantities.  I think there can be debate about whether it should be Treasuries plus MBS. I think President Lacker would probably prefer it to be targeting the base to get the same outcome. But we wanted to put this on a table as kind of a straw man to get the Committee thinking a little bit about different ways to help us manage expectations better.  Its also contingent on economic conditions, which we think is important. So, Mr. Chairman, I know we surprised you with this, but you asked us this question, so we thought wed try to come up with an alternative thats worth discussing. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I appreciate it. Thank you. Its interesting, and some may view the lack of specificity between MBS and Treasury as a plus, and some might view it as a minus.  But its an interesting alternative, so I appreciate your doing that.  Did you want to talk at all about the choice of the substantive alternatives? 
     MR. PLOSSER. I have a preference for Treasuries in general, as I discussed yesterday.  My preference for Treasuries is not particularly driven by a desire to push down long-term interest rates so much as it is by a desire to help manage the composition of our balance sheet.  Im not as worried about the effect on inflation expectations of buying Treasuries, in part because, if there is a concern about expectations of inflation, its that I really dont want them to fall. So I am not too worried about that aspect of it, and I do prefer Treasuries.  In terms of the magnitudes, Im sympathetic to expanding, but I dont have strong opinions about how much we should expand. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, to state the obvious:  Were at the zero bound, were resorting to extraordinary tools to offset the deflationary and other consequences of overly tight monetary policy, and we have to deploy that extraordinary tool kit effectively, deliberately, and with clarity. President Lockhart injected a little humor by congratulating you on your having an interchange named after you and pointing out there is an off-ramp.  There is no off-ramp right now, unfortunately.  And President Pianalto pointed to your 60 Minutes performance, which I also wanted to applaud, except to point out there was one weakness:  You were opposite George Clooney in that time slot.  [Laughter] I mention these things because Im sympathetic to what President Plosser mentioned, in that, (a) there is no off-ramp, and (b) we have to think way ahead.  I talked two years ago about decision trees. We at least have to think of where this highway is possibly going to take us.  The ad hocery of what we are doing is a bit of a concern to all of us at the table; but lets acknowledge the fact that we are in extraordinary circumstances, and we have to play ball according to whats on the field. 
    I do have a preference, as I stated yesterday, to focus on where we have demonstrated extraordinarily well our capacity to play, which is in the mortgage-backed securities market.  Im very sympathetic to President Rosengrens argument, particularly as to timing. Although I dont have a vote in this matter in this cycle, I would support alternative B.  I still have concerns about being viewed as monetizing deficits.  I think theres a possibility that the political classthat is, the legislaturewill ask for still more.  But its not clear to me whether buying Treasuries might be interpreted as our accommodating fiscal profligacy, although I understand the circumstances of the moment, which are certainly trying.  I think Governor Tarullo offered a very sophisticated approach to this yesterday, which is to do things in proportion; and I could live with the alternative that that has the lesser weighting on Treasuries.  I do think it is important to exercise our muscle in the mortgage-backed securities market.  My contacts tell me that when you get to the 4 percent level, you do have some effectiveness, and I think thats clearly an area where we want to have extraordinary effectiveness. As to the statement itself, Mr. Chairman, Im not sure why were emphasizing the job losses and all of the things that, as I said in my note, youre aware of even if you live on Mars.  I do worry about that, given the fact that we are the institution that everybodys looking toin part because we did get out ahead of the rest of the world.  Were viewed as a precious institution with, I think, superior credibility compared to all of the other institutions of government at present. Im not sure its helpful to keep pounding on the negative.  The economy is contracting, and it continues to contract. We neednt say more.  The important thing is that we say what were going to do about it, and we do so with clarity. 
  Let me add parenthetically that I appreciate your moving the fed funds decision down to where it should be, which I believe both of us asked for last timethat is, moving it down in terms of order of priority. I want to conclude with one last statement.  My greatest concern is the TALF.  I think I made that obvious.  I would caution you to be very careful on this publicprivate partnership.  I made my living doing extraordinarily complex transactionstaking distressed companies, restructuring them, and taking the equity outand I was confused yesterday by what was described.  But Im more worried about the politics of it.  I think we have to be very careful with our precious franchise in dealing with an embattled opposite, particularly on the Administration side, so that we dont jeopardize our special standing in the community by appearing to accommodate political necessity and exigency.  I would urge you, and this Committee, to stay away from the legacy assets for now.  And I would urge you to be very careful about any commitment to the publicprivate partnership concept.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Pardon me.  I missed one point I wanted to make in my comments.  President Fisher reminded me of it.  In our B, one of the things we changed was the description of the economy, which, Jim and I both agreed with President Fisher, sounded panicky.  We changed what I think was in paragraph 2 to take out a lot of the detailed description and wrote, The decision reflects the Committees view that the economy is undergoing a severe contraction, which it is. And we said the near-term outlook is weak.  The other change in the same spirit is in the rest of that sentence:  the Committee anticipates that market forces and policy actions will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth.  I think in the original it says that policy actions alone will stabilize the world.  And, frankly, I think 
   creating an impression that the only game in town is policy actions and that market economies have no contribution to make in this stabilization is setting us up for failure and a credibility problem. So we added the reference to market forces.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im going to talk a little more about this B option. Let me just follow up on some of President Plossers and some of President Fishers comments. When we think about optimal policy under interest rate targeting, which is what were all used to, we decide what were going to do and we communicate it.  It has a path because youve got a rule in mind about how youre going to operate policy in the future, so that gives you a projected path, and that allows the private sector to coordinate on that path.  Thats all part of how the equilibrium works and how the optimal policy works.  What Im concerned about right now, and in the last couple of meetings, is that were not doing that.  Because we hit the zero bound, the interest rate targeting regime was taken off the table by events, so were ending up with these one-time announcements, with round numbers, and that makes the future path of policy unclear.  The private sector, as I said yesterday, will try to guess what the FOMC will do, regardless of whether we say anything or not.  For years and years we didnt say anything. But we can do a lot better, I think, by reducing that uncertainty and by laying out some kind of a pathheres what were thinkingand making it contingent, of course, on macroeconomic events.  So thats what we are trying to get at here. Clearly, the focus is on asset purchases around the table, so this B certainly talks in those terms.  A problem that Im concerned about is that pre-committing to a particular number without making it contingent on macroeconomic developments may not be wise.  Incoming data may not match up with the commitment that you made.  It would be the same thing under 
  interest rate targeting. You would say, were going to go somewhere today, theres a projected path out there, but, of course, its always dependent on incoming data. Alternative B tries to address these issues, and I might say its equally well called A, because its not really tied to particular amounts.  In fact, you might end up with a little more in total here.  Its very aggressive, lets put it that way. First, the form of the statement:  You say the main thrust of policy at the beginning of the statement, which is something Id like to see us do, and we certainly did that under the interest rate targeting regimewe would say right away what we did with the fed funds rate.  The fed funds rate at zero is not news right now. Even the fact that its going to stay at zero for a long time is not news right now.  So I just moved that part down in the statement.  Most of these statements have that. There are three principles behind this B, so let me just talk about them.  First of all, there is the agency MBS plus Treasuries as a group. Second, theres a growth rate feature to it, so you talk in terms of growth rates instead of specific numbers.  And the third principle is that you adjust in response to economic developments, so you have this policy rule aspect. Let me address all three of these.  First, the agency MBS plus Treasuries:  This is certainly the type of large-scale asset purchases that weve been talking about.  It avoids mention of balance sheet growth as a whole, because youve got volatile aspects of the balance sheet that are under what I would call liquidity provision.  There youve got the TAF in particular (its whoever shows up for the auctions), youve got the swaps, and youve got the commercial paper facilities. Thats now about $1 trillion, as President Lacker was pointing out.  Its kind of volatile. Its liquidity-oriented.  Our own projections expect that to run off as financial 
    conditions improve. So this version just sets those programs aside and thinks about managing them separately. The agency MBS plus Treasuries as a group provides some flexibility.  As Trish has pointed out, MBS can be lumpy.  Youve got this refi wave coming in.  So you could do more MBS at certain points, and you could do more Treasuries later, and you dont have to specify it at the level of the Committee.  There are good arguments on all sides about the choice between MBS or Treasuries, and demerits on both sides, so I think maybe the thing to do is just mix them together and provide some flexibility.  Also, my own view on this is that theyre both backed by the Treasury effectively, anyway, so I dont see a lot of difference. Now youve got this persistent component of the balance sheet, which is the MBS plus Treasuries, and thats going to grow at this 10 percent approximate rate.  Frankly, its an extremely rapid rate, but thats what we want because were in a very sharp downturn here.  Then, youve got these temporary components of a balance sheet, which are going to run off, hopefully, when the financial market turmoil abates.  And its this underlying trend that you want to get the markets to focus on, as the Chairman was saying a minute ago.  So this is a plan for expansion in the persistent components of the balance sheet, and it helps coordinate private sector expectations and reduce uncertainty about policy going forward.  This has been a key private sector concern, as weve heard around the table.  All of the contacts are saying to us, What are you guys doing?  I dont understand the policy.  There are all these announcements.  I 
cant figure it out. So maybe this is a simpler and more transparent approach, without getting into a lot of specifics about particular asset categories. The biggest thing for me, and perhaps for Prcommitting.  You can adjust as you go along.  This is a plan, but, like an interest rate path, it 
  would be contingent on macroeconomic developments, and youre not stuck with a particular number going forward.  Thats the third part: Youd be able to adjust this in response to economic developments.  Again, were going to be at zero nominal interest rates for a long time, probably globally. I think its important to try to lead globally and give a signal to other central banks about how they might implement their policies.  This is a kind of a feedback rule. Obviously, we dont know what the rule is at this point, and we dont know how much we will react to incoming developments.  Thats something we have to learn over time.  Hopefully, we can figure that out as we go along. But this would get us going in that direction and provide a credible replacement for our interest rate rules that were taken away from us by events. Thats my case for the main part of it.  Ill talk just briefly about the other parts of the statement.  The description of the economy, paragraph 3, is whittled down from the text in some of the other statements.  Thats in response to President Fishers comments.  We can certainly say that the economy is in bad shape, but I dont think we have to say too much more than that.  Obviously, because we put convenient numbers on here, you can mix and match with your other 
favorite descriptions of the economy. I agree completely that we should be very aggressive in this situation.  But we need to be aggressive in an organized way. Also, were taking unprecedented actions.  You have to be careful about going too far in a direction without a plan.  We dont know what the effects really will be; our models really dont tell us too much about it.  So this alternative holds out options for adjustment as data arrive.  Hopefully it would provide better communication to the private sector, and hopefully youd get a more effective policy out of that.  A lot of communication is not just us talking, but it is saying Ive got a clear path for future policy. 
  Im very concerned about deflation near term.  Im concerned about a deflation trap in which you go to this new steady state and get stuck there.  But a medium-term risk is that the economy behaves sort of like normal, and if a normal recovery takes hold, then youve got a possibly explosive inflationary situation. But thats down the road.  You have to avoid the deflation trap outcome first.  Maybe if we did get to that medium-term stage, this would set us up to be able to react to that situation a little better.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you again for constructive suggestions.  I have a couple of questions. I do want to point out we did try in alternative A to create a reaction function element in the very last sentence, where we say, We will be assessing whether a faster pace would be helpful. Essentially, the pace will be varying as conditions changeits hard to 
be more specific than that.  I guess I have one question for you and one for Trish.  For Trish, maybe you can help me.  What do you think would be the effect of not specifying the breakdown between Treasuries and MBS? MS. MOSSER. Wed immediately get the question:  Whats the breakdown between Treasuries and MBS?  And what are you going to do about agencies?  But the agency debt market is the simple part to answer, because thats a much smaller market.  I think wed end up having to give a hint, or they would take away from our first two operations what your preferences were, whether that was correct or not. MR. BULLARD. I took it from the discussion that people would like to front-load MBS to the extent thats feasible.  But this formulation would let you still have growth later on, if you want. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have a question for Presidents Plosser and Bullard about the flexibility you get by saying just per month without any specification of timeframe.  I 
 imagine you would, therefore, have less of an announcement effect, and it would be more difficult to do a persuasive front-load in that case. MR. BULLARD. I dont know why the announcement effect would be any different.  It adds up to the same amount. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For example, one thing you could sayIm just trying to be helpfulwould be a combined average of about 10 percent per month in the next few quarters, or something like that, to give a bit of a horizon. MR. BULLARD.  Yes, sure. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This also relies on people being able to do geometric calculations. [Laughter] Ill put that aside for now. MR. PLOSSER. Well, actually, Mr. Chairman, we did debate whether or not there ought to be horizon on it. But I think you could give a horizon if you wanted to, as long as you kept the conditionality that we will monitor this going forward and that its subject to economic and financial conditions. MR. LACKER. I am not sure I understand one point about this.  Presidents Bullard and Plosser propose a geometric path.  But why not pick an endpoint and go linearly to that? That is what we are doing with the MBS so far. Doesnt that make more sense?  We could still call that 10 percent per month. MS. MOSSER. I would say in fact, to President Rosengrens point, one might actually want it to be front-loaded. MR. PLOSSER. I think we say an average of 10 percent a month. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Lets go on, if I might.  President Rosengren. 
 MR. ROSENGREN. This was the most depressing go-round in a year and a half, and this was a really bad year and a half, so it highlights that were far away from where we want to be, both in inflation and in unemployment.  And in terms of communicating with the public, I think thats what were communicating to the public:  Were not where we want to be, and we want to get there as quickly as we can. I dont think simple rules on the balance sheet or the monetary base are appropriate.  These are different programs for different problems.  If the interbank market is disrupted, I would expect swaps and TAF to go up. If we have a real problem in other areas, Id want to do significant asset purchases.  These are not substitutes, and just having either a balance sheet or a monetary base rule is assuming that these programs are substitutes for each other.  Theyre dealing with different problems. I think this is an opportune time to push down rates as significantly as we can.  I think we should be very aggressive. I think everybodys discussion around the table indicated we should be aggressive. I like the idea of heavily weighting on MBS purchases; I think that will be the most effective. I also like the idea that, if were going to try to get the most bang for the buck, given that these are experimental programs, we ought to try at least to see what happens with the Treasuries as well. So my preference would be to do the combination of A and B, which is the $1.15 trillion total, to try to have as big an effect as possible.  And I would try to front-load it so we get as much impact in the spring as we can.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously, sentiment is pretty gloomy around the table, and theres a fair amount of consensus that we want to make monetary policy more aggressively stimulative with our actions at this meeting, and were grappling with how to 
   structure that shift.  I think it makes sense to embark on a fairly aggressive asset purchase program, but I think we ought to admit that were fairly uncertain about how our actions are going to go about affecting the economy.  This isnt different in principle from four years ago then we were unsure about how another quarter point one way or another was going to affect the economy.  But the magnitude of the uncertainty is quite significant here. Weve talked around this table for a year and a half about different theories of how these programs and our actions are affecting the economy.  Weve talked about credit market frictions, asymmetric information, and other frictions that might inhibit certain markets ability to respond adequately to disruptions. Were not going to settle that debate here.  Weve also talked about the effect of changes in the monetary base.  Banks appear to have absorbed a humongous amount of reserve holdings without a readily discernible effect on a lot of other aspects of their behavior.  It suggests banks are more or less indifferent between holding reserve balances and other assets that function as very liquid reserves.  And, if so, that rationalizes the view Ive heard some express that increasing the supply of bank reserves is generally going to be ineffective at the margin.  And there are some readings of historical episodes of very low interest rates that are consistent with that as well. But this logic has its limits.  Commercial banks hold only about $1.3 trillion in Treasury and agency securities, so if theres a flat spot in the demand curve by banks for bank reserves, it might not take that much more of an increase in our balance sheet to get past that flat spot.  And if we do that, I think theres bound to be some effect; there just has to be a finite upper limit on this flat spot of the demand curve for reserves.  And even before that, Id expect some rates of return to have to change. I have a bank in my District that held $136 billion in reserves a couple of days ago. Surely the configuration of repo rates and the other instruments they operate in 
   must have an effect on their willingness to hold that much in reserves.  Its really hard to know where that upper bound iswhere the end of the flat spot isbecause we dont have much data to draw on; but I think it must be there.  So, as I argued yesterday, I think we need to recognize some uncertainty about which theories are the right ones to rely on and how to think about what we do. I take the credit easing weve doneprogram by program, aimed market by marketas arguing that more of those programs in more of those markets is more stimulative than fewer in lower dollar amounts.  I think that the logic of this focus on the monetary base also suggests that more monetary base is more stimulative than less.  So, in the current setting, I think trying to ensure that we at least achieve a certain amount of growth in the base is consistent with both views and worth pursuing. Thats what has motivated my line of questioning for Patricia 
Mosser, and it motivates why Id like to suggest that we put a clause in the directive, at the end of sentence four, that says, but should ensure that the monetary base expands by at least X billion dollars during the intermeeting period.  I dont think we should conduct policy by slapping 47 constraints on the Desk at every meeting, but it strikes me as a small thing to ask in order to be sure that the stimulus that might be withdrawn as some of these programs roll off is offset as we go forward. I would favor the larger program that you outlined, Mr. Chairman, with the $300 billion, the $750 billion, and the $100 billion increases. I like the idea behind the suggestion of Presidents Plosser and Bullard about putting a commitment to a pattern of purchases in the statement.  But for the reasons I just outlined, Im not sure that gets us where we want to be.  It seems to me that if we did that, and yet the balance sheet went down by the end of the year because of a bunch of other stuff rolling off, Im not sure wed be persuaded that we had made 
     monetary policy more stimulative or eased credit.  So Id like to see us focus on the overall size of our balance sheet and our programs and the base.  That would provide as well with an overarching framework, a kind of coherence to what we do, to convey the sense that were not just responding market by market, but that we have an overarching conception of how were providing stimulus and how were going to get through this.  And I share the view of Presidents Fisher, Plosser, and Bullard that toning down the language would be useful.  It has always been the case that theres a mapping from words we use, like somewhat adverse, to peoples interpretations, which are much scarier than somewhat adverse. I think were stepping outside that mapping when we go as far as we did in the statement as its drafted. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. First, Trish and Spence, would you folks think about a sentence that could be added to one of the directives, to the effect that The Desk will strive to 
ensure that the monetary base or the size of the portfolio, or something like that, has a positive monthly growth rate, or whatever you think would be realistic or manageable?  We dont want to put in something that, just for operational reasons, doesnt work. MR. EVANS. Ive been listening to this, and Im sympathetic to the different ways wed like to try to characterize a path.  I think its very difficult.  Ensure is a strong word.  I had been thinking about maybe something weaker like, We would expect to see the base grow, which is sort of an indicator of how we think things are going, but not the policy rule itself. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It is the expectation of the Committee that the base will be growing over time, or something like that?  Does that help? MR. HILTON. Balance sheet or base? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Federal Reserve liabilities?  Im just making this assignment, and theyll come up with a suggestion.  Well discuss it at the end, okay? 
     MR. EVANS. Perhaps with a clause conditional on stability in certain lending facilities. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well make some kind of attempt.  Its just a good faith effort, thats all. MR. LACKER. If I could suggest, because of the possibility of SFP or Fed bills, you might want to try both the base and the balance sheet, rather than choose one. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, well worry about SFP when we get it.  [Laughter] Let me address this issue about pessimism.  I just want to point out that the January statement was isomorphic to what were proposing to say in this one.  Its in your handout.  Its not exactly the same, but its very similar.  The only difference is that the last sentence in January was that the downside risks are significant, and we leave that out of this one. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, President Fisher. MR. FISHER. We did state it before.  Therefore, why dont we just say continues to contract or contract severely?  Again, were hammering this point, and I believe we are beginning to be scary. Just for a moment, I want to go back to your 60 Minutes show. I think that was a positive.  It was a lift, and we engendered some confidence.  Here we are just pulling the rug out again. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.  I hear the point. 
MR. LACKER. Its the severe contraction phrase, I think, that gets attention. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Lets see if I can hit some of the highlights here. I certainly agree with everybody else that we need to be going in with everything we can 
  under the current circumstances. And the question is: What can we do, and how can we explain it? I favor your combined alternative A plus B.  I think that qualifies within the limits of what we can do as a good effort under the current circumstances.  As we discussed yesterday, what we do know is that asset purchases seem to be the most effective thing we can do.  Weve seen the MBS purchases be effective.  I think its a good idea to use all of the tools, and buying Treasuries is one of the tools, so I think we ought to include Treasuries.  I think theres enough evidence from the event studies that that will have a positive effect on financial conditions.  Im not worried about the issues of monetizing the debt or inflation expectations, given the size of the output gap and given the fact that were working on exit frameworks at the same time and weve strengthened our discussion of the long-term inflation objectives. In terms of shifting the emphasis to the base, President Lacker, you talked about uncertainty in linking our portfolio to the economy.  I think that goes for the base as well.  I actually asked a senior official at the Bank of England how he would explain how increasing the 
base and increasing the money supply were supposed to affect the economy.  I got kind of a shrug of the shoulders and Well, weve run out of this other stuff, so were going to talk about this stuff now, rather than a really coherent explanation of how the transmission channels run from the base to the money supply to the economy.  So I guess Im not ready to put my marbles 
entirely in that particular basket yet.  In particular, I cant quite link the short-run fluctuations in the basethe meeting-to-meeting or week-to-week fluctuationsto what were trying to accomplish.  I think it depends a lot on why the base would go down.  If it went down because the whole demand for credit was going down and the economy was weakening, then we ought to be leaning against that and trying to increase the base.  But if it went down because markets were 
  working better or because, for example, Europeans had better access to dollar funding, I dont think thats something we necessarily have to lean against.  I do think, under the current circumstances, seeing a long-term upward trend in the base is useful and useful discipline on the Committee.  But linking to a month-to-month growth rate or meeting-to-meeting fluctuations within that long-term trendI dont think that will help market confidence, I dont think thats really going to be useful to us, and I dont think it will be seen as putting a new framework that everybody understands around monetary policy.  Broad money growth actually has been quite strong in the United States. It was at 14 percent plus in the fourth quarter, and 10 percent in the first two months of the year, so were not seeing that kind of tightness. I agree with President Fisher that the TALF is complex and difficult.  This is a difficult situation. I think were constrained, as I said yesterday, by various laws and regulations about what we can do and whats politically possible in this situation. So its very uncomfortable, but Im not sure we have any alternatives other than the asset purchases on the credit side of the balance sheet. And I think we ought to just push ahead and make the best of a difficult situation.  Certainly doing something about legacy assets is very critical to the health of the banking 
system.  If we can contribute, I think we ought to do so, without jeopardizing our ability to carry out monetary policy over the long term or taking credit risk on the balance sheet. On the various wording issues, Id prefer alternative A or A plus, or whatever it would be in your combined alternative, Mr. Chairman.  As you can tell from my previous comments, Im not sure that saying something about the growth in the base on a month-by-month basis or the growth in assets on a month-by-month basis would actually reduce uncertainty.  I think the markets would kind of wonder what that was about.  Maybe we could prepare the way. Maybe we should do some research to look at how these things are linked together.  But right now, what 
      they expect us to do is talk about the amount were going to buy. I think the fact that were leaning towards MBS is important.  So Id go with the wording of alternative A. My problem with A is that Im imagining what it might be like if we didnt take any additional actions at the next meeting.  Suppose at the next meeting we just decided to continue with what were doing, then I dont know what A would say. So Im more comfortable with the ordering of the paragraphs in A than I am with A. On the first paragraph, I did think the end of the first sentence, the economy is undergoing a severe contraction and that the outlook for the next several quarters has worsened, could be read as suggesting we expect a sharp decline in the economy for several quarters.  So I certainly would cross that out.  On the rest of it, I wondered, as you did, Mr. Chairman, about cutting back on all of the detail as compared with last time, whether people would notice that.  Im kind of indifferent and will go along with wherever the Committee wants to come out on that.  I do think we need to say that were in a contraction, the near-term outlook is weak, and we expect things to stabilize later.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. If I can respond very briefly to Governor Kohn, I agree with everything you said about uncertainty, about the mechanisms by which changes in the monetary base are transmitted to economic conditions, and about the difficulty of articulating how those mechanisms would work.  I wouldnt advocate putting all of our marbles in that policy transmission mechanism.  Id just note that its a viable contender, and we ought to act as if that might be how were affecting the economy.  Hitting a target for monetary base growth, plus or minus, isnt what I was advocating.  I was just thinking about making sure its at least as stimulative as we think it ought to be.  I appreciate his comments.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
   MR. HOENIG. Thank you. As we talk about this statement, I think its sadly ironic that, after weve doubled the size of our balance sheet, were having a conversation about being worried that it may shrink a little bit.  Its incredible to me that we would have that.  And I agree with what Governor Kohn said in that I dont think we should start talking 10 percent monthly growth or whatever it is. Were trying to deal with a broken intermediation and banking system at the same time, and I dont think we can turn it into a monetary policy instrument in terms of how much we expect the balance sheet to grow at this point. With that, I would say I am much more in favor of statement B as we had it.  I would admit that the banking system is broken.  Thats part of the reason were doing the TALF.  If were going to expand and were going to address the broken intermediation process, we should focus on mortgage-backeds.  Thats what the idea was to begin with.  Lets stick with it. If we now introduce Treasuries into that (1) I think its only going to be confusing, and (2) I think we do have to look long term. Our introducing purchases of longer-term securities farther along the yield curve sets a precedent, and I dont think its easy to back off from that once we get through this mess were in right now.  So thats why I prefer B. I also want to take just a minute and talk about the legacy TALF.  Theres reference to populist reaction to this, and I actually think that this reaction is justified in important ways.  We ought to think about that, because people are now confused between TARP and TALF, and I think when we add the legacy TALF, its going to confuse things even more.  The reason that theyre reacting to it is TARP.  I agree that it was necessary to keep from having a meltdown, but the execution of it was so confusing and so inequitable across the system that it created great backlash. Some of the backlash was very justifiedfor example, when you have some banks being told, Youre going to take it, and a thousand other banks being told, You can beg for 
 it, and following that up with changing the rules, youre not going to get anything but a backlash. I think thats important to keep in mind. So as we think about going forward, I come back to President Fishers point about needing a decision tree on how were going to deal with these legacy assets.  Our getting involved in the legacy TALF, as Ive heard it described to this point, is, I think, very riskyvery dangerous, almostin terms of what the outcomes might be, because there arent clear, defined decision trees indicating whos really going to be accountable for what.  We need to get that clarified before we have another reaction like the one we had recently. Finally, I do want to come back to something Governor Kohn mentioned yesterday in reference to my comment about using excess reserves to help manage the balance sheet and set the rate floor.  I know that it got off to a rough start, but I think we are getting our sea legs and the industry is getting their sea legs.  If we start issuing Fed bills, I think we are introducing another tool that will start out with the best intentions, but expectations will be raised, how we use it will be brought into account, questions will arise about trying to get around debt ceilings and so forth. I think we should try to avoid that if we can and see if we can use our interest on excess reserves as a management tool.  So with those comments, Ill again say Id go with B.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said, I think were in the midst of a very severe recessionits unlikely to end any time soon.  The optimal policy simulations would take the fed funds rate to negative 6 percent if it could, and because it cant, I think we have to do everything we possibly can to use our other tools to compensate.  With respect to what we should 
  do today, my preference is for the combined alternative that would combine $750 billion of mortgage-backed securities, $100 billion of extra agency debt, and the $300 billion of Treasuries. I certainly support the MBS purchases.  I think theyre likely to have a very positive effect on the housing market, particularly now, and I certainly agree with President Rosengrens suggestion that we should front-load the purchases for the reasons he gave.  I said yesterday that I would also support purchases of Treasuries. I think it would be useful to begin that now.  I favor diversification of what we do, given the uncertainties about the impacts of any of these programs.  Theres a principle elucidated by William Brainard 30 years ago that, when policy actions have uncertain effects, you should simultaneously use all of your instruments, and I think thats a worthwhile principle for us now. A couple of things on language. One of the differences between A and B concerns the characterization of how long we plan to keep the fed funds rate low.  A states for an extended period, while B uses the phrase for some time. The fed funds futures market at this point seems to expect rate hikes next year.  Thats not our own expectation, and to try to align market expectations better with ours, I would like to see the switch to an extended period as in A.  With respect to A or Athat issue of what goes firstI could certainly accept either.  I was positively inclined toward A on the principle that it makes senseand weve always done this to state right away what the policy decisions are.  Now the focus is not on the fed funds rate, so it makes sense to state that weve decided to do such-and-such with respect to programs. But I 
think that Governor Kohn has made an excellent point, raising the question, What will we do if 
we dont have any action on a particular day?  It may be difficult; we dont want to keep shifting from one thing to another if we cant envision how were going to write that on the day we dont do anything new. I guess I would agree that its better to stick with the A formulation. 
  With respect to alternative B that Presidents Bullard and Plosser proposed, I really thought it was a very worthwhile and constructive idea.  There are aspects of it that I liked and that I thought were quite sensible, such as suggesting some conditionality of what we might do relating to economic and financial conditions and having some flexibility in the composition of 
what we do. I thought that was very interesting and useful.  But I would emphasize that I dont agree with the underlying theory that says that there is a relationship between the size of the monetary base and our impact on the economy, and I would associate myself with the comments of President Rosengren and Governor Kohn on this.  So I dont like the language that suggests an emphasis on the size of our balance sheet and the size of the base.  I think we have a real theoretical disagreement among ourselves as to exactly how our policy works, and I just 
wouldnt endorse going in that direction. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Just to respond a little bit, this doesnt say anything about the monetary base. This says large-scale asset purchase done in a certain way, which, I guess, is what our model has said.  This is just a way to set the asset purchasesthats my intent. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said yesterday, I think that its important that we do something big, so your combined proposal is closer to that for sure, and I definitely think that we should diversify our actions.  Im a little concerned that were not going to have a lot of good evidence on how effective these programs are for a few quarters.  Maybe well be able to interpret something from how the yields move around, but they also move around a lot 
anyway. We like to take credit when they move in the right direction.  And then other things happen. I dont knowits very difficult. The delays are:  It takes time to implement, it takes 
 time to have an impact, and it takes time to assess.  So as President Yellen indicated, we dont have enough confidence to bank on a single nontraditional channel, I prefer doing more of these. I am a little sympathetic both to the discussion about the usefulness of indicating something about the timing and to the way that Presidents Plosser and Bullard characterized this in terms of growth rates.  What did seem to come out in the discussion that I, at least, was not aware of, was how we intend to play these purchases out.  There are good market reasons for the way theyre done, and the markets understand that.  So finding some way to provide that information, I think, would be useful.  I can see why the growth rate is attractive, but indicating front-loading or something about the time element seems to be important. We do have an awful lot of programs in place that are intended to be stimulative.  Theres everything that weve done, with the TALF increasing, and theres what the FDIC has done, with the TLGP. I dont believe that weve seen anything in terms of the outlook for what the FDIC part of this new program, with the Treasury purchasing bad bank assets, would be either, but presumably that would be stimulative as well.  By the time we put all of this in place, weve got a lot that should be helping out.  So the question I have is how to quantify what is enough.  As Governor Kohn mentioned, we should be doing everything we can do, so I think the combined proposal is better. Frankly, I dont understand why we couldnt improve this to $500 billion in Treasuries, too. Were a little arbitrary, it seems to me, in terms of the total magnitude. I would like to be able to point to something like our Bluebook analysisan analysis where we think that this is as close as possible to our best model-based thinking, on what the optimal policy response would be to reach the best we can achieve for the unemployment rate, recognizing that there are outcomes we cannot achieve.  The reason for wanting something like this is, I would like it to be big enough now so that we can shift the hurdle for additional action at 
  the next meeting more toward the outlook has now deteriorated further, and we need some type of action. Because, at the next meeting, were still going to have calls for Whats next?  Whats next?  We know how to think about responding in terms of the fed funds rate and where the target is, but the target for asset purchases is less clear, so thats why my preference is for more now so that we can shift that burden. Id be willing to expand the Treasury purchases to $500 billion, but nobody else has indicated that. Finally, I think that we can spend an awful lot of time trying to get the wording exactly right so that were all happy with it.  I think its going to be incumbent upon all of us to make some public comment.  When we talk in public, some of these issues will come up, and I think 
some of it will naturally be fleshed out if there are residual uncertainties.  Obviously, when you speak, Mr. Chairman, you clarify things quite a bit, but there might be some things for the rest of us to say. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The rationale for a slightly smaller purchase of Treasuries is that we dont know what the effect will be, and its kind of a toe in the water thing. MR. EVANS. I guess I didnt indicate that I do prefer alternative A the way its written.  In terms of the next meeting, the alternative A issue could be dealt with by saying something like the Committee decided not to change its policies or its programs. In order to shift the burden, I would like to consider whether there is some language such that with todays action we anticipate this better outcome in the last sentence.  That would help a little bit there, but its just a suggestion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I am informed, President Fisher, that you have to leave for a plane. I am also informed that today is your 60th birthday. Is that correct? 
 MR. FISHER. What a nice way to celebrate my birthday.  [Laughter] With people I greatly respect, and I just want to say I hope I live to be as old as Don Kohn.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We do have to move along here.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the case for increased asset purchases is pretty compelling.  Its the sense of the Committee, and certainly I agree with that.  So I have to think through a series of other decisions.  The first one has to do with scale, and my thinking coming in was that the scale needed to be proportionate to the deterioration in the outlook. Speaking at least for myself and the Atlanta analysis, clearly, there has been deterioration since January, but its within the range that I would have assumed at that time was plausible.  So Im a little concerned about overreacting.  When we first got the alternatives, alternative B was $500 billion, and that, of course, was entirely in mortgage-backed securities and agency notes. Yesterday we learned that the TALF is likely to roll out slowly.  Thats information that, I assume, is not going to be understood by the public.  It would probably undermine the program if we said that we expected that.  I had factored the TALF into my sense of proportional response. So I favor the alternatives that are below $1 trillion dollars.  I dont want to overstate this, but I think we dont have good guideposts for how to size the action, so I think its reasonable to ask: Will the public infer from our actions that we know something that they dont, and is this response of over $1 trillionwhich will probably get some headlines really a signal that things are even worse than they actually are and in that sense could dig us a little bit deeper? Regarding timing:  if we go with the mortgage-backed securities alternative, I do favor the views of President Rosengren that theres a chance of accelerating that and making it have high impact in the near term.  I can support the Treasury idea.  But I actually think the central 
   question is the choice between Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities.  I can support Treasuries, but my bias really is to favor the mortgage-backed securities option, so that would be one of the option Bs. I like that for its certainty, its impact on housing, and its clarity in communications. As I mentioned yesterday in my comments about communications, certainly what Im hearing is that many of our constituencies would prefer simplicity and not a lot of new programs, so Im leaning against the Treasury purchases because it adds complicating factors.  But if we are going to support the Treasury purchases, I endorse Governor Tarullos suggestion that we explain why we did it very clearly. For example, if we are doing it for liquidity reasons, then we should explain that; if were doing it for the purpose of scaling up the balance sheet, we should explain that; if we believe that there are spillover effects, we should be explicit about that in our rationale. Regarding statement content, I have some sympathy for the version offered by Presidents Plosser and Bullard, but Im not sure we can avoid quantities.  I think the logical question that the press is going to ask, having been conditioned to hearing quantities, is:  How much does this add up to?  Its very hard for us not to provide at least some estimate of that.  Conceivably there is some way of crafting language that would address both the pace of purchases as well as the ultimate quantity.  I dont know how specific we have to be in the directive to make it a workable directive. So Id leave that up to the Desk.  Im also okay with toning down severe contractionthat was my original reaction when I read the alternatives a few days agoto something thats not quite as stark as that.  Regarding statement structure, I dont have a strong feeling. I think we have two options.  You either have a structure that builds up to the action, which has been our traditional approach, or the action followed by the rationale.  I have a slight preference for building up to the action, based on Governor Kohns comment, namely, what 
   happens if we dont, in fact, have an action.  We certainly want to be consistent going forward, as much as we can, on how these things are put together.  So given all of that, where I come out is in support of alternative B, but, when it comes down to the vote, I will support A, A, or A plus or B [laughter], or B. Yes, Ill end with a reference to Charlie Brown:  You know, sometimes Im wishy-washy and sometimes Im not.  My definitive support is for alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, on the issue of explaining the Treasury purchases in alternative A, if we do the combination, wed want to import the sentence from alternative A that starts with, Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided....  So that follows up the previous language and explains that were not monetizing the debt and so on.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is clear to me from our discussion of the outlook that more action is needed, but as I said earlier, I also think we need to focus on the clarity of our communications in order to build public confidence. Looking over the options that were presented today, I do prefer alternative B. I am clearly in favor of aggressive action, and as I noted yesterday I am open to the purchase of longer-term Treasuries, but as President Lockhart just mentioned, in the interest of effective communications, I think we need to better explain why we decided to engage in the purchase of Treasury securities at this time.  Brian gave us four reasons why we might want to consider that, and as you know, Mr. Chairman, in our statement in January we did say that we would do that in order to improve conditions in private credit markets, but I still think that may be a little too vague. While the staff comments yesterday indicated a little less certainty that we get a larger bang for the buck if we purchase MBS versus Treasuries, I think we do have evidence that 
  purchases of MBS have generated significant interest rate reductions just through their announcement effects.  Also, the staff simulations highlighted yesterday the economic importance of stabilizing housing prices and the effects on household wealth.  So, with the larger purchase of MBS along with some of the Treasury initiatives working in tandem, I think alternative B is a preferred way to go. In terms of the statement language, the option of B or B, I slightly favor putting our actions in the front line or the first paragraph.  There is some premium, I think, on clear and easily verifiable actions in these difficult and confusing times, although, after listening to Governor Kohns comments about what do we do when we dont take actions, I see that that might be a little confusing.  But overall, B is my preference at this meeting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, it seems like almost everything is fair game.  So let me just make a few comments.  I expressed my reservations about legacy TALF yesterday, so I wont reiterate those. I hope I was clear.  With regard to purchasing assets, I do favor including purchases of Treasuries.  I did back in December, I think, when we first talked about it. I continue to. So I would certainly go down that path. That leads me to alternative A and the language, and Im willing to go with the larger quantity that you proposed. All of the quantities are around $1 trillionquite honestly, Im not sure were going to get a big difference in terms of market or macroeconomic effects at the end of the day, but I can certainly go with that. I would start with the language in alternative A.  Just a couple of comments about that. I think I would be in favor of abbreviating the litany of the economic conditions.  I dont know that it adds all that much at this point.  If we say severe 
contraction, I think that gets the message across.  With regard to A versus A, you could 
   probably take care of Governor Kohns concern at the next meeting by just saying, if we didnt do anything new, that the Committee reiterated its intention, and I think that would probably take care of it. But I dont see any great advantage, quite honestly, to reworking it, at least at this point. So I have a mild preference for A as written. Having said that, I do think the Plosser-Bullard approach has merit, if we can get over some of these questions that have arisen, such as, What will people in the market make of it? and Will people still want quantities? and Is there a way of integrating that approach with some quantities, if that would help clarify things?  I think those are all worth serious consideration. I dont have the answers today, so Im not proposing that we adopt that.  But I do think that perhaps there are at least the beginnings of a framework there that we ought to be thinking about at future meetings and that may serve to help our communication and help people in the markets understand better than they do right now where we intend to go.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a few points first.  Given the policy uncertainty that weve all described that is out there in the world, it strikes me our preferences here in this room should be putting a greater emphasis on things that are clear and purposeful versus those that are big and bold and more.  Clear, purposeful, big, bold, and moreif you could pull it all together in one fell swoop, that would be fine, but absent that, I would put the preference on clear and purposeful. Weve talked a lot about the makeup of our balance sheet.  I would just reiterate a truism which I think still has meritour biggest asset here is our credibility, which is a function of a lot of things, including clarity, success, and trying to speak as much as we practicably can with one 
 voice; and that will obviously govern my vote in support of the consensus emerging from this discussion. Having said that, I continue to have a strong preference for avoiding Treasuries for reasons I described yesterday and given that, since December, markets seem to see us as alternately having some affection and disaffection for purchasing Treasuries for reasons that have been hard to understand. I think we need to be prepared to address that issue if, as I expect, we include Treasury purchases in our statement today. In terms of the size of these various elements, I think the only thing worse than buying Treasuries is to buy them in such a tepid way that we dont have any effect.  I think if were in, were in. Were crossing the Rubicon.  And I take very little comfort from the idea that we would be somehow testing this out just a bit.  So I think, in effect, what were really all saying, Mr. Chairman, is we are balance-sheet-constrained.  There is only so much of these new assets, whether they be mortgage-backed or Treasuries, that we are comfortable with, given the risks to our flexibility. So I am troubled that the $300 billion will be perceived to be relatively light.  But given peoples preferences around here, I wont spend more time on that. In terms of some of the language, I concur with the emerging consensus that we should delete some of the carnage in describing the economy on the grounds that it is well understood.  Ive got next to nothing to offer on style between prime and nonprime. And on the PlosserBullard proposals, I think that its a pretty interesting framework.  I dont think its ready for prime time, so Id associate myself with what President Stern said, that it would be a useful way in which we could start to think in anticipation of our next meeting.  But I dont think at this moment we can easily capture that in a way which goes back to first principles of being clear and precise.  Thank you 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am actually in favor of the largest amount that we can all agree on. My objective, as I stated yesterday, is to have the biggest effect on housing that we possibly can. In terms of how we explain that, I do like the prime version, because it puts the action first. Having spent more of my time reading the statements than issuing them, it seems to me the first paragraph was always the action paragraph.  And I think for a good time to come this will be our action.  In addition, I think the easier we can make this to report, the better off we are. If you get reporters, particularly third- and fourth-level reporters, on a deadline and all they read is the first part and skim through the rest, they may not necessarily pick up the size of this action. So I have a pretty strong preference for the prime version.  Also, while I find it interesting to put it on a percent-growth basis, weve already started down the path with the dollar amounts, and I think continuing with the way weve been communicating it already has some certainty and some simplicity.  To me it feels like announcing a stock repurchase in the private sector. In that case, you size your stock repurchase in relation to the amount of outstanding shares that you have, and its perceived that way and tends to impact your price that way. Finally, on measuring effectiveness, I think the questions at this point would be:  How big an effect does it have immediately on housing, on the stock market, and on things that create wealth, and how quickly do we see whether or not it has spillover effects? The last piece is this sentence that says we will be assessing whether a faster pace of asset purchases would be helpful in improving credit market conditions.  I originally liked that, because it implied that we were willing to do even more.  On thinking about it, though, theres something to be said for creating a little bit of fear in the housing markets that this is a window 
     of opportunity to refinance or purchase. So if it doesnt look like rates may go down further if you wait, then I think thats got some real value.  So I suppose ultimately I come down in favor of A plus. [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I must find new nomenclature, Im afraid.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Of the options on the table right now, I favor the combined option. Like Governor Duke, I would have been receptive to a higher number, and I guess President Evans would have been as well.  The reason for that is twofold: (1) just because of my understanding of the magnitude of the challenge right now, and (2), as President Evans said, I think, its really very important for us to be able to project a strong but adaptable approach to monetary policy, not just until the next meeting, but over the course of the next year. It seems to me that by rolling out a bigger, more ambitious headline number, if you will, but then saying were going to implement that over an extended period of time, it gives us the opportunity at each of the next several Open Market Committee meetings to say we are staying with an aggressive policy.  In contrast to when youre working with the fed funds rate and you either have to stay where you are or reduce it another 25 or 50 basis points, here one could say that the Desk is continuing in an aggressive fashion to make purchases. That leads into the issue of communication more generally, and like President Lockhart, I think the maximum amount of explanation of what were doing and why were doing it is important.  There is and has been over the last several days a near obsession among markets about whether or not we are going to engage in large-scale purchases of Treasuries.  I will predict that theres going to be a lot of speculation about why were doing it.  I will also predict that the explanation that its helping improve conditions in private credit markets will not seem 
  to most commentators to be a complete explanation.  Thus, in an effort to respond to Governor Warshs concernswhich I dont share to the extent of being unwilling to do securities purchases, but do think are importantI would hope that in the delicate but important arena of communications outside of the formal statement, we will be able to find a way quite quickly to clarify why were doing this. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think one argument thats been made here is that we want to diversify in different markets. MR. TARULLO. Right, exactly. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously, theres a need for more stimulus, and it looks like less support is going to be coming from other quarters, so a substantial escalation is appropriate.  Obviously, given what I said yesterday, I favor doing both.  I would favor scaling up the Treasuries size to $500 billion from $300 billion, per Governor Warshs comment that, if youre going to do this, you might as well do it in size.  I dont think the balance sheet constraint here is really meaningful, because we can sell or repo the Treasuries at a future date. So I just dont think thats a reason to make the distinction between $300 billion and $500 billion, and I think well have a more definitive test of how the market perceives this if we do $500 billion rather than $300 billion. At $300 billion, if we dont get much response, were not going to know if it was because the market thought the scale was small.  I think $500 billion is a more appropriate metric.  I favor A over A just because I think its simpler and its more consistent with what weve been doing. And I agree that we should not be quite so scary in reminding people of how badly the economy is doing. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Lets try to put this all together.  Most importantly, I think theres a pretty strong consensus for the combined package, the total of $1.15 trillion. I heard the point about doing even more in Treasuries.  I guess I think that just crossing the Rubicon will have a significant announcement effect, because it will signal our willingness to do more if necessary in the future.  I am a little concerned about misinterpretation of what were doing, so I guess I would like to propose to stay where we are for the moment.  We can always change it. I very much appreciate the contribution from Presidents Plosser and Bullard.  I dont think were quite ready to go there, but I do think we can start communicating in that way and start trying to talk about percentages as we talk in speeches and other contexts.  I think, in particular, since we want to front-load, its hard to put it in percentage terms at the moment.  And I think that to get the maximum effect in the short run that Governor Duke talked about, it would be better to have a headline number.  But I think its actually a very constructive point, and we should think about ways to move in that direction if we can. So what I propose is to start from alternative B.  I think its reasonable to do either B or B, but I didnt hear a huge amount of demand to go to B. I heard the concerns about the first paragraph. What if we say that the economy continues to contract, as some suggested? Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates the economy continues to contract, period, and wed drop the outlook has worsened as well.  Then, if you like, we could drop, say, the sentence that starts with Weaker sales prospects, but I think that is consistent with our previous style in trying to describe elements of the economy.  Then I would note that we have a somewhat optimistic ending in this paragraph.  So I dont think 
  that its going to be a huge shocker to anybody, and we do have to motivate why were taking such a strong action. Comments? MR. PLOSSER. Just a quick remark.  I had suggested this notion of putting in market forces in terms of returning to stability.  I didnt know whether you had forgotten that, but nobody ever commented on it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No. I was trying to keep life as simple as I can, but lets see here. Where is it? MR. PLOSSER. The Committee anticipates that market forces and policy actions will contribute to  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are people okay with substituting that sentence? 
MR. TARULLO. To what market forces are you referring? 
MR. KOHN. I think what I heard around the table, Mr. Chairman, was not much confidence that market forces are moving in that direction and might even be moving in the other direction. MR. PLOSSER. Theres not much confidence that government forces are going to fix it either. So Im not sure. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Surely, if the economy recovers, its going to be a combination of policy actions and market forces.  Surely thats the case. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, all were saying here is that these things will contribute. Were not saying that theyre the only reason. Let me go on.  President Bullard. 
  MR. BULLARD. I just want to press on that a bit.  It gives the impression that were hanging on a thread as to what the Congress does or what we do or something like that.  I dont think you want to leave that impression.  Despite what the government does, you might recover faster or you might recover slower, and I think you should leave that thought in the minds of private citizens. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Again, I think what were saying here is that we anticipate that these things will contribute to an overall dynamic. In B, in the third paragraph, we have the sentence about the additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its purchases of agency debt this year by $100 billion to a total of $200 billion. So thats exactly as in B.  Can we say something like, the Desk has been instructed to? MR. MADIGAN. I have a possible sentence, Mr. Chairman.  The timing of these purchases will be determined, in part, by conditions in primary and secondary mortgage markets. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont think thats what people wanted to say, though.   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think its fine for the Desk just to accelerate its purchases, and the market is going to see it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is it okay to do it that way and not put it in the statement? MS. MOSSER. Thats all right. I had something very similar to Brians.  I actually stole the last sentence from alternative A. MR. MADIGAN. Part of the issue, Mr. Chairman, is that we dont know exactly when the bulge in issuance is going to happen. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Ill come to that one.  Thank you. Lets back up a second. There is the question of federal funds rate for some time.  President Yellen suggested going to for an extended period. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think thats more accurate.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are we okay with that? 
MR. PLOSSER. Can somebody explain to me how I am supposed to interpret that change? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Because conditions have worsened, our expected liftoff time is probably longer than it was. Then we have the sentence on the agency debtthats okay.  Then the next sentence about prepared to purchase long-term Treasuries is to be replaced by the sentence in alternative A: Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Are we putting up tos in front of all of these numbers? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. Do we have up tos in the original announcements? MR. MADIGAN. Yes, I believe so. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think they are always up to. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  So lets make sure we have consistency with that.  As Governor Duke and some others noted, there were questions about the last part.  We should end the last sentence, The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the Federal Reserves balance sheet in light of evolving financial market 
  developments, period.  Why dont we say in light of evolving financial and economic developments instead?   MR. PLOSSER. You just added economic.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But Im dropping all the stuff about assessing our lending programs.  At this point were in an assessment mode.  I think the only question remaining, Brian, is the up to. MR. MADIGAN. I think that may be actually difficult to work in here quickly in some cases just as a grammatical issue. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think the one issue, though, is to make sure its not quite so definitive that you are committing to purchase exactly that number.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why dont we put up to in front of each?  So its up to an additional $750 billion. MR. KOHN. agency debt this year by up to $100 billion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And then on Treasuries, purchase up to $300 billion.  Brian, are you ready to try to read? MR. MADIGAN. I can try. [Laughter] From the top, Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the economy continues to contract. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The rest is the same, and the second paragraph is the same. 
MR. MADIGAN. So the third paragraph: In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal 
  funds rate for an extended period. To provide greater support to mortgage lending and the housing markets, the Committee decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet further by purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its purchases of agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion. Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months  Then there is the TALF sentence.  Then, The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the Federal Reserves balance sheet in light of evolving financial and economic developments. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Were ready then.  President Lacker? MR. LACKER. The directive? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The directive, youre right.  Do we have something, Trish? MS. MOSSER. About either the pace of purchases or the size of the balance sheet? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The directive is to be made consistent, and we said something along the lines that  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We have to put the Treasury sentence in the directive. MR. LACKER. Can we use Directive A? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We dont issue the directive at 2:15, do we? MS. DANKER. But we vote on it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well put in the Treasury part. Then, can you include a sentence like, The Desk will endeavor to ensure that the size of the portfolio rose? 
  MS. MOSSER. Yes. We could say, The Committee anticipates that the combination of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet to expand in the coming months.  Were a little hesitant to pick the next intermeeting period because of the lumpiness of mortgages, honestly.  But if that would suffice, we think that would work best from our perspective.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Expand significantly even. MR. LACKER. That works. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that okay? 
MR. LACKER. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Are we ready for a vote now? Debbie, would you call the roll, please?  MS. DANKER. 
Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes Governor Kohn  Yes President Lacker   Yes President Lockhart  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes President Yellen   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  The next meeting is April 28 and 29. Well adjourn.  Lunch will be available, and over lunch, Laricke Blanchard will provide us with an update on congressional activities.  Thank you. END OF MEETING 
           
  
 
   _______________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April 2829, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday April 29, 2009, at 
9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo 
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist  
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate Economists Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open Market Account Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors  Attended Wednesdays session only. 
       
           
 
 _______________   Ms. Barger and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Banking Supervision and Regulation and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors  Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Messrs. Levin, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wascher, Associate Directors, Divisions of Monetary Affairs, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Mr. Carpenter, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Palumbo, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Judson and Mr. Nichols, Economists, Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Messrs. Rosenblum and Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, and Cleveland, respectively Mr. Hakkio, Ms. Mester, and Messrs. Rasche and Rolnick, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City , Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively  Messrs. Burke, Hornstein, and Olivei, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New 
York, Richmond, and Boston, respectively Mr. Rich, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York  Attended Tuesdays session only. 
                                                       Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on  April 28-29, 2009 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  This is a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board, so I need a motion to close the Board meeting. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you. Our first item of business is to get reports on Desk operations, liquidity programs, and balance sheet developments.  Let me  turn first to Trish Mosser.  Trish.  MS. MOSSER.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Financial conditions have improved modestly in the last month and a half, reacting to aggressive policy actions in many countries, some improvement in the near-term outlook for the largest financial firms, and tentative signs that the free fall in global economic activity may be leveling off a bit. Equities are up, credit spreads are narrower, the dollar is weaker (thats probably a good sign in this environment), volatility is down, and liquidity in many markets has improved.  Despite these modest improvements, financial markets and institutions, by any normal measure, are very stressed.  In short, the calm in markets is very uneasy, and continued improvement will depend critically on upcoming policy 
initiativesparticularly the outcome of the capital assessment program (CAP)and of course, on the evolution of the macroeconomy. The May 4 release of the CAP results is a major risk event for financial markets, probably the largest since the passage of the TARP legislation last fall.  Importantly, the risk surrounds not so much the disclosure of which large banks are likely to need additional capital in a stressed environment or even how much capital they might need. Those can be estimated.  The important new information in the CAP release is 
the plan for how those capital holes will be filled, including what next steps banks will need to take, how and when government capital may be used, and what conditions will be imposed upon the banks.  Lack of clarity about standards and 
future actions is likely to lead to even greater uncertainty about the future viability oflarge banks, and it increases significantly the risk of bank runsin either wholesale or retail markets. As exhibit 1 shows, credit default swap spreads have narrowed in recent weeks, as macro news has been less dire and equity markets have rallied.  High-yield spreads have fallen more than 500 basis points since early March, and notably cash bond spreads of both investment-grade and high-yield corporates have fallen even more than CDS spreads, signaling some improvement in corporate bond market liquidity.  
Credit spreads of financial firms have also narrowedby more than 100 basis points 1 The materials used by Ms. Mosser are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
   since early Marchbut much of the narrowing has occurred outside the U.S. banking sector. Concern about the nature of government intervention in the banking industry has prevented a significant narrowing in spreads, despite stronger equity prices.  A comparison of exhibits 2 and 3 makes this clear.  Despite rising stock prices and declining volatility, most U.S. bank CDS spreads have widened in the last month and a half. In contrast, European banks, whose equity price performance is similar to that of U.S. banks, have had a narrowing of CDS spreads. Setting the CAP and the political environment aside for the moment, exhibit 4 shows that banks first-quarter performance surprised to the upside, with most large global banks beating the Q1 earnings expectations, in some cases by wide margins.  That said, however, the quality and the sustainability of these earnings have been questioned, and the uncertainty about banks ability to absorb future losses particularly related to consumers, leveraged loans, and commercial real estate remains high.  As you can see in the last column, regulatory capital ratios for most large U.S. banks exceed requirements, but their ratios of common equity to capital (in the third column) remain quite low.  Tangible common equity relative to assets has 
become the de facto measure of bank health for most market participants, for a couple of reasons. First, losses have to be covered by revenue and common equity, and given market uncertainty about the future size of bank losses, more common equity is viewed as a sign of health regardless of other types of capital.  Second, the public policy focus on potential needs for additional common equity (directly or through 
convertible preferred equity) has increased the markets focus on that measure.  It is 
particularly interesting to note that European banks, in the bottom half of the table, have significantly lower tangible common equity ratios (and regulatory ratios) than U.S. firms.  Moreover, most analysts believe that European banks are not as far along in writing down their assets as their U.S. counterparts, and they have proportionally more recession-related losses ahead of them.  Nonetheless, European bank equity performance has been about the same as that for U.S. banks; and as I noted earlier, 
European bank credit spreads have narrowed, whereas those of U.S. banks have 
widened. Another measure of the near-term uncertainty regarding U.S. banks can be seen in the term structure of bank CDS spreads in exhibit 5.  Normally CDS term structures slope up slightly. However, currently banks CDS spreads are inverted, suggesting that if banks can survive the next two years, then the probability that senior debt holders will face losses is significantly diminished. Despite the hand-wringing over the near-term future of the banks, liquidity conditions in many markets have improved.  In particular, some of the unexploited profit opportunities that we have noted in the past are now actually being exploited.  For example, in exhibit 6, the spread between three-month funding in the foreign exchange swap market relative to LIBOR has narrowed to pre-crisis levels.  This 
reflects better liquidity and trading conditions as well as a willingness of banks and others to take some additional risk onto their balance sheets.  Similarly, exhibit 7 shows a decline in the average absolute difference between actual and modeled 
       Treasury yields, reflecting an increased willingness by market participantsbanks, dealers, hedge funds, and so forthto commit balance sheets and to arbitrage away the price differences in the Treasury market. At the bottom of the page, exhibit 8 shows jumbo and conforming 30-year mortgage rates. Not only have both mortgage rates come down, but the spread between them (in orange) has actually narrowed since the last FOMC meeting.  You might well be surprised at this.  After all, the secondary market for securitizing jumbo mortgages remains closed, and the Fed purchase program is focused solely on conforming mortgages.  So one might expect that, whatever effect the Feds program has had in lowering conforming rates, this progress could well be to the detriment of the jumbo market.  But that is not what has happened.  Jumbo rates appear to have fallen about 50 basis points in response to the decline in Treasury yields after the March FOMC meeting and notably have remained at those levels since then. I have already highlighted one market response to our Treasury purchase program; let me turn there next.  As you can see in exhibit 9, the FOMCs program to purchase $300 billion in long-term Treasuries by September had an immediate announcement impact on long-term Treasury yields.  But since then, long yields have drifted higher and are now just 10 to 15 basis points below the pre-March FOMC levels. Of course, its hard to know the counterfactual here.  Given the large quantity of new Treasury issuance and less dismal macro news, Treasury yields might be well above their mid-March levels in the absence of Fed purchases.  We are more 
encouraged by the effect of the purchase program on volatility and liquidity.  Exhibit 10 shows that implied volatility in both Treasury and swaps markets fell sharply on the announcement and have remained low.  Actual volatility has fallen as well. Market participants tell us that, although our purchases materm Treasury yields from rising, they expect that such increases will be more orderly because of our regular presence in the market.  Market participants are already 
discussing (and pricing) what may happen when the Treasury purchase program ends.  At present, most expect that the Treasury purchase program will be expanded and extended beyond September. However, the risk that the program may expire in September is reflected in options prices.  Implied volatility over the next six months has fallen, but volatility over the subsequent six months has been rising in recent weeks. The Desk is focusing its purchases in the 2-to-10-year segment of the Treasury curve, consistent with the FOMCs directive to help improve conditions in private credit markets.  As you can see from exhibit 11, we are making smaller 
purchases outside this target rangeto the disappointment of some market participantsbut will continue to concentrate most of the $300 billion in purchases 
between two and ten years. Somewhat to our surprise, we are purchasing a sizable amount of on-the-run Treasuries.  Because of the very large amount of new Treasury 
supply and the continued pressure on dealers to keep their balance sheets smthe-runs are being offered to us in large sizes and at quite competitive prices relative to the market.  One last note about the Treasury market:  This Friday a new market standard of charging for failures to deliver in the Treasury market will go into effect.  While we wholeheartedly believe that this will improve Treasury market liquidity 
   when interest rates are low by reducing the incentives to deliberately fail, there may be some anomalous Treasury movements in upcoming weeks as market participants adjust to the new standard. Turning to the mortgage-backed-securities purchase program, exhibit 12 shows the daily pattern of our agency MBS purchases, including the step-up in average size after the March FOMC meeting.  Our purchases have been a little smoother in recent weeks largely because volatility is lower.  Early on we bought more on days when MBS prices were low and less on days when prices were high.  As volatility has declined, there are fewer of those days.  In addition, because volatility is lower, originators are selling more forward and at a steady pace, which is reflected in our purchases. We are purchasing TBAs (the forward MBS) at about $135 billion per month, although we anticipate that delivery will be lumpy and that June deliveries of MBS, in particular, may be very large.  Exhibit 13 shows a limited announcement 
effect on agency MBS and mortgage rates after the March FOMC.  Since then, however, primary rates have drifted lower, and secondary MBS yields have been stable, despite the rise in Treasury yields.  Given the size of our MBS purchase program, we are not surprised at our ability to influence secondary-market MBS yields, but we have a more limited ability to influence primary mortgage rates.  The good news is that the primarysecondary mortgage spread has not widened with the recent large refinancing wave (unlike earlier this year), but overall the spread remains quite wide by historical standards. The spread is affected by a number of other 
factors, including fees charged by the GSEs; the costs of hedging mortgage inventories, servicing spreads, and valuations; and the pricing power and capacity 
constraints of the originators. Unfortunately, our purchases can help to influence only some of these factorsspecifically, hedging and pipeline costsand the Administrations housing program can help to lower GSE costs and servicer costs, but the other factors (in particular, pricing power and capacity constraints) may, in the future, work to push spreads higher. Exhibit 14 makes clear why our ability to influence MBS yields is larger than our ability to move Treasury yields.  Our MBS purchase programboth to date and as planned through the end of 2009represents a sizable portion of expected new MBS supply this year.  In contrast, our announced Treasury purchases amount to less than a third of expected issuance over the life of the program. Although the TALF subscription in April was even smaller than we had anticipated, we are somewhat encouraged by the price response and the fact that non-TALF securitizations have come to market as well.  Exhibit 15 shows that secondary-market spreads on triple-A-rated ABS continued to narrow after both TALF subscriptions. Moreover, the yields on new securitizations have been at least 100 basis points tighter (and in some cases, as much as 700 basis points tighter) than the spreads in exhibit 15. Much of this drop in yield is due to better liquidity conditions and the fact that TALF subscriptions have provided the market with some price transparency for the first time in months.  As shown in exhibit 16, better liquidity and pricing have encouraged non-TALF securitizations as wellparticularly in auto loans and credit cards, where activity had effectively ground to a halt last fall.  
     As in our purchase programs, one measure of success for the TALF is whether other market participants follow us in.  If the TALF, even in small sizes, can provide some price discovery and a bit of liquidity to the ABS market, it could be a catalyst for improving credit conditions.  In short, the economics of the TALF work.  But the program continues to be dogged by the slow take-up by borrowers, particularly by political baggage, including repeated contradictory statements by various public officials regarding the TARP-related rules of the road for borrowers on issues such as executive compensation.  The outlook for the upcoming May 5 subscription is for 
six to eight consumer securitizations for an estimated $7 billion to $9 billion.  On the supply side, as many as 14 TALF-eligible deals could come to the May subscription and 12 additional deals in June; but given the uncertainties on the demand side of the market, we are hesitant to predict a sizable subscription at this point. The liquidity facilitiesthe TAF, the swaps, the commercial paper and money fund facilities, the TSLF, the PDCF, and the PCFcontinue to shrink as conditions in money markets have improved.  LIBOR, foreign-exchange swap, and financial CP spreads are all narrower since the March FOMC meeting.  Some of this is due to reduced demand for funding as financial firms delever and term out their debt, particularly through the FDIC guarantee program.  However, market participants do report some increase in the availability of term funding.  Although most of the programs are slowly winding down, the CPFFshown in exhibit 17is lumpy.  This 
week about $150 billion in CPFF paper is maturing.  Since yesterday, $85 billion of this paper has matured, but less than half of thatabout $40 billionhas been reissued to the facility. If this trend continues for the week, CPFF outstandings could fall below $175 billion. Exhibit 18 summarizes the overall trends in the balance sheet, most notably the step-up in purchase programs and the continued shrinking of liquidity programs.  The balance sheet grew more than 8 percent in March and 5 percent in April (at monthly rates). This has been accompanied by similarly impressive growth rates in the monetary base. The lumpiness of several of the programsCPFF and MBS 
purchases, in particularmakes it unlikely that we will achieve steady growth of the balance sheet from week to week or even month to month; however, the balance sheet and the monetary base will almost certainly continue to expand at a rapid pace in the near term.  Our outright purchases are now on the order of $200 billion per montha much faster pace than we anticipate (or almost anyone does) for the rolloff of the liquidity programs even if market conditions continue to improve.  So we expect robust balance sheet growthon the order of 6 percent per monthin the near-term. Seth and Chris will be discussing long-term balance sheet trends in a few minutes.  As a prelude to that, our latest primary dealer survey suggests that few expect changes to our purchase programs at this meeting but many place higher odds on program expansion as the year proceeds.  Dealer economists expect that by mid-2010 the Fed will have purchased more than $1.3 trillion in MBS, $500 billion in Treasuries, and over $200 billion in agency debt.  In other words, nearly everyone expects significant expansion of the Treasury purchase program, and some expect 
                                                       expansions of the agency and MBS programs. Longer term, the expected path for the fed funds rate, shown in exhibit 19, actually moved up somewhat.  On average, dealers now expect the fed funds rate to rise to about 1 percent by the end of 2011. The continued rapid expansion of the balance sheet as well as the shift in  composition away from near-term liquidity facilities and to long-term lending and purchases naturally raises a number of questions regarding how the Desk is going to conduct monetary policy in the future when the FOMC would like to target a higher policy rate. Although the Committee may feel that that particular policy decision is well down the road, the staff has already begun work on how the Desk could achieve a significantly higher policy rate with a balance sheet that is very large and composed mainly of long-duration securities and loans.  We are preparing an extended briefing and discussion of this issue for the June meeting.  To preview some of the tools and instruments that we are considering:  First, if we are granted legislative authority to 
issue central bank bills, how could that authority best be used?  Second, how might 
our current legal authority to pay interest on excess reserves be used to allow better control of the policy ratefor example, through the use of a redeposit facility?  There are a number of legal and operational complexities to work through on this topic.  Third, to what extent can we sterilize excess reserves by lending out our portfolio of securities via the repo markets and the MBS dollar roll market? Given the very large size of our holdings, it is unlikely that we could feasibly lend out the entire portfolio, but even lending out a portion of our Treasuries, agencies, and MBS might be helpful in targeting a higher policy rate.  Fourth, how feasible will it be for the Desk to sell securities in order to shrink the portfolio, including the potential impact on interest rates, financial market liquidity, and the Feds income?  We doubt that there is a single magic bullet in this list, but we will continue to work through the legal, operational, and accountingnot to mention policyissues and will report back to 
you at the June meeting. Finally, I would like to request a vote to renew our long-standing bilateral swap lines of $2 billion with the Bank of Canada and $3 billion with the Banco de Mxico.  The Committee received a memo from Nathan and me recommending the annual renewal of the lines now, although we are well aware that our recent experience with liquidity swaps warrants a wholesale rethinking of these facilities.  We will do that, 
and we plan to come back to the Committee in the not-too-distant future with a more 
thoughtful discussion of the role of swap facilities across central banks.  In the meantime, we recommend the renewal of these smaller lines.  I also request a vote ratifying domestic operations since the last meeting.  Seth will now continue the presentation. MR. CARPENTER.2 Thanks, Trish. Mr. Chairman.  For this meeting, the Bluebook included a new section that presented projections for the Feds balance sheet, and Ill be referring to the exhibits in the handout entitled Material for FOMC Briefing on Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base.  The projections 2 The materials used by Messrs. Carpenter and Burke are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
     that we put into the Bluebook were linked directly to the policy alternatives presented in the Bluebook.  Chris and I will briefly explain the assumptions that underlie those projections, caveats associated with the exercises, and the projections themselves. Under the current policy approach, the scale of asset purchases and demand for Federal Reserve liquidity and credit facilities, given their terms and conditions and the evolving financial and economic conditions, will drive the size and composition of the Federal Reserves assets and the quantity of liabilities.  The composition of those liabilities will be determined primarily by the evolution of currency demand and other factors on the liability side of the balance sheet, with reserve balances determined largely as a residual.  The balance sheet projections are bottom up forecasts based on assumptions about the various components of the balance sheet.  We should emphasize at the outset that all of our assumptions, and therefore the resulting projections, are subject to significant error.  The significant uncertainty surrounding the outlook for the economy, the uncertain response of users of Federal Reserve credit to the state of financial markets and the economy, and the fact that some elements of the balance sheet are policy choices make these projections more judgmental than typical forecasts. The charts in exhibit 1 illustrate the assumptions that the staff has made.  As suggested in the top set of graphs, we assume that the Board extends at least some of the section 13(3) lending facilities beyond their current expiration dates later this year and that the FOMC extends the horizon for the foreign central bank liquidity swaps.  The recent improvements in functioning in some markets, however, have led to 
decreased usage of several facilities, as Trish noted.  For example, draws on the foreign central bank swap lines and borrowing from the TAF have fallen so far this year. Consistent with this development, we assume that demand for credit from all of the facilities, with the exception of the TALF, falls to zero over the next couple of years as markets recover.  The assets held by Maiden Lane, Maiden Lane II, and 
Maiden Lane III are assumed to mature or eventually be sold over time; they reach zero in 2015. In light of the slow initial uptake of the TALF, under the baseline projection the facility is assumed to peak at $500 billion at the end of 2010, half of the announced $1 trillion limit.  For the baseline, we also assume that all TALF loans have a three-year maturity and that none defaults. As shown in the next set of graphs labeled Securities, in the baseline scenario (denoted by the blue lines) the Desk purchases $300 billion of Treasury securities, $200 billion of agency debt, and $1 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities this year as directed by the FOMC in March.  We assume that the agency debt and Treasury securities are held to maturity.  MBS are held to maturity as well but are subject to prepayment.  Given the historically low coupon on the securities that the Desk has purchased, we assume a slower-than-average path for the prepayment of MBS that implies that approximately half of the MBS purchases remain on the 
balance sheet in 2016. Of course, the Committee may consider other possible courses for policy. Consistent with alternative A in the Bluebook, one alternative scenario is based on an additional $450 billion in purchases of Treasury debt (the red line in the 
      graph). Another scenario includes the additional Treasury securities as well as a TALF that reaches $1 trillion, with a second wave of loans that have a five-year maturity, shown by the red lines in the middle row of the top set of charts. On the liability side of the balance sheet, we assume that Federal Reserve notes, shown in the bottom set of charts, expand at the same rate as money stock currency as 
projected by the staff under the Greenbook forecast through 2010 and at the rate of nominal GDP growth thereafter.  The Treasurys accounts at the Federal Reserve return to historically normal levels from their current total of roughly $300 billion; specifically, the supplementary financing account falls to zero, and the general 
account returns to the $5 billion target by the end of 2009.  Taken together, these assumptions plus additional assumptions for miscellaneous assets and liabilities imply 
a path for reserve balances. Chris will now discuss the projections. MR. BURKE. Thank you, Seth. Mr. Chairman.  I will now review the baseline balance sheet projections, which are shown in exhibit 2.  As Seth noted, assets determine the size of the Federal Reserves balance sheet over the next several years.  If credit extended under 13(3) programs and through the liquidity swaps evolves as assumed, the long-term asset purchases and TALF loans will be the dominant factors driving balance sheet growth. The baseline projection sees these programs expanding 
rapidly over the remainder of this year, and consequently, total assets surge and eventually peak at $3.4 trillion at year-end, an increase of about $1.2 trillion from current levels.  At that point, agency debt and agency MBS make up over 40 percent of total assets, whereas Treasury securities represent less than a quarter of total assets, 
much less than the roughly 90 percent share that Treasury debt represented in 2007.  The increase in TALF loans also contributes to the very rapid expansion of the balance sheet in 2009. Subsequently, however, with asset purchases having ceased 
and TALF loans no longer being extended, the maturation and the prepayment of 
assets cause a gradual contraction in assets until the end of 2015.  At that point, the Desk resumes open market operations to maintain reserve balances around the 
$25 billion level. Because balance sheets balance, total liabilities increase along with assets this year. Given our assumptions for steady and moderate currency growth, the level of 
reserve balances largely parallels the path of assets, although the substantial reserve-adding decline in Treasury account balances at the Fed further increases reserve balances this year. In the baseline scenario, reserve balances peak at $2.4 trillion at the end of this year. Thereafter, reserve balances decline, following the contraction in assets, and approach zero in 2015. Because some positive level of balances is needed 
for the implementation of policy, as noted above, we assume that the Desk resumes its historical practice of open market operations to offset drains of reserve balances caused by currency growth and maturing assets. We calculate the monetary base as the sum of currency and reserve balances.  As presented in exhibit 3, in the baseline scenario the monetary base grows rapidly in 2009 and into 2010. After the first quarter of 2010, however, the monetary base 
        begins to contract as the liquidity facilities are winding down, new asset purchases cease, and previously purchased assets begin to mature.  The base continues to contract until 2015, at which point the expansion of currency and the stabilization of reserve balances lead to a resumption of growth. If economic conditions worsen or the Committee judges that greater stimulus is warranted, an even greater expansion of the balance sheet would result.  A more aggressive path for asset purchases, like alternative A in the Bluebook, assumes an additional $450 billion in purchases of Treasury debt in 2009.  An even greater escalationalong the lines of that assumed in the Desk memo of April 24, 2009, to the Committeeassumes the same $450 billion in new Treasury debt purchases and also assumes that TALF loans reach the $1 trillion limit.  Moreover, for illustrative purposes, the second wave of TALF loans is assumed to have a five-year maturity.  The resulting path for the Federal Reserves assets is shown in exhibits 4 and 5.  Under these alternative scenarios, assets peak at $3.7 trillion and $4.2 trillion, respectively. Similar to the baseline, after asset purchases stop and TALF loans reach their limit, assets begin to decline.  Under both alternative scenarios, the balance sheet shrinks to the same size as in the baseline scenario in 2015.  Given the greater amount 
of assets, reserve balances are also larger in these two expansion scenarios.  They peak at the end of this year at $2.9 trillion and $3.2 trillion, respectively, but decline in a manner similar to the baseline until the end of 2015.  As was shown in exhibit 3, the growth in the monetary base is qualitatively similar to that in the baseline. Under the Greenbook projection, the Committee is assumed to begin raising the federal funds rate in 2013. At that point in the baseline, there is more than 
$400 billion in reserve balances, and balances are even higher under the two expansion scenarios.  Thus, these projections implicitly assume that alternative tools 
and operating procedures can be put in place to achieve the path for the federal funds 
rate consistent with the goals of monetary policy even with elevated reserve balances. As Trish noted, these issues are under study by the staff and will be discussed at the 
next meeting.   MR. NELSON. Thank you, Chris. Mr. Chairman.  As indicated in the memo circulated to the FOMC on Friday, we are recommending that the Board expand the 
list of TALF-eligible collateral to include commercial-mortgage-backed securities and insurance premium finance ABS.  We are also recommending that the New York Fed offer five-year maturities on loans collateralized by CMBS and certain other long-lived assets. The TALF documentation has from the outset signaled a likely expansion to CMBS.  We are currently proposing that the TALF accept newly issued CMBS. We expect to have a proposal for legacy CMBS in a week or two.  Today, we propose accepting newly issued, fixed-rate, triple-A-rated CMBS that are not subordinated to any other bonds in a given CMBS pool.  The loans in the pool must all be on income-generating properties. We anticipate that the TALF-eligible CMBS will be used to refinance maturing loans that had been conservatively underwritten (and therefore retain significant 
       positive equity) and to purchase distressed propertiesthose in or at risk of default.  Providing liquidity for refinancing would help prevent an increase in defaults on economically viable commercial properties, prevent further stress on current holders 
of the maturing mortgages, and free up their balance sheets for additional lending.  Providing liquidity to finance the purchase of distressed properties will help facilitate the price discovery process and reduce the high levels of uncertainty about property values. When evaluating the appropriate haircuts, we tried to take account of credit losses, the likelihood that the TALF loans would not be repaid, and mark-to-market losses. We propose haircuts of 15 percent for CMBS with an expected life of 5 years or less, rising to 20 percent for CMBS with an expected life of 10 years.  The haircuts would then be boosted by a projected 6 to 8 percentage points on average by the diversion of interest carry to repay the loan, which I will discuss in a minute.  In 
addition, in contrast to our procedure for TALF 1.0 assets, we will have a collateral 
gatekeeper that will review the deals and exclude those that appear unacceptable. In the current economic environment, loss predictions are especially uncertain, but we did our best. Using these haircuts, we anticipate that in a stress scenario, defined as a 1-in-10 event, about 10 percent of the loans would default and that the collateral at the time of default would be about 20 percent below the loan values.  
Thus, for the entire portfolio of CMBS loans, we project losses in a stress scenario of 
2 percent. At the same time, we would be charging the five-year swap rate plus 100 basis points on the loans.  The excess spread on the loans accumulates as a first 
loss position.  Over the life of the five-year loans, that buffer will amount to about 5 percent of the loan portfolio.  Because the accumulated excess spread is more than double the expected losses, we expect that, even in a stress scenario, neither the Treasury, which is in the second loss position, nor the Federal Reserve, which is in the third loss position, would experience losses on the TALF loans backed by new-issue CMBS. We anticipate that the New York Fed will accept a different set of NRSROs for CMBS. Currently, we take Moodys, S&P, and Fitch ratings on the collateral 
accepted for all Federal Reserve lending.  A Systemwide project is under way to develop procedures for evaluating rating agencies for each collateral type, but the full project will take many months to conduct.  We accelerated the review of NRSROs for CMBS. The results are not quite complete, but we anticipate that the list of 
recommended NRSROs for CMBS will differ from the list we have used in other 
lending programs. The other asset class we propose adding to the program is insurance premium finance ABS. Insurance premium finance ABS are backed by loans to small 
businesses to pay for property and casualty insurance.  Unlike households, businesses pay for such insurance upfront. More than 1 million of these loans are extended to 
small businesses each year.  When we asked market participants what remaining ABS categories we should have accepted under TALF 1.0, we were unanimously told 
         insurance premium finance ABS.  The ABS bear very little credit risk because the underlying loans are collateralized by the residual unused insurance premium.  Nonetheless, spreads on these ABS have ballooned along with other ABS spreads.  We spoke to the four largest premium finance companies.  Three of them are enthusiastic about the possibility that these ABS might be TALF-eligible.  One of those three is AIG Credit, a subsidiary of AIG.  The unenthusiastic company is BB&T, which is benefiting from its funding advantage as a bank. We are also proposing that the TALF begin to offer 5-year loans.  All TALF loans currently have 3-year maturities. CMBS generally have 10-year terms.  Market participants were uniformly of the view that the TALF would not be very helpful for CMBS unless the loan maturity is lengthened.  The maturity mismatch is also a significant negative for student loan ABS and SBA ABS, which have even longer maturities than CMBS.  We propose offering TALF loans with 5-year maturities for 
CMBS, student loan ABS, and SBA ABS.  We would also propose that 5-year loans be offered for newly issued RMBS and legacy CMBS and RMBS if these assets are eventually added as eligible collateral. A 5-year loan term reduces the maturity mismatch and extends the refinancing problem well beyond the expected end of the recession. In order to reduce the risk that this program might impede your ability to raise the funds rate above zero when the time comes, we would limit the total amount of TALF loans with 5-year maturities to $100 billion.  For now, we propose extending 5-year loans to all who request them and otherwise qualify, but we would develop and put in place an auction mechanism in the future if it appears to be necessary.  As an incentive to encourage investors to choose a 3-year loan or to repay a 5-year loan early, we propose diverting some of the interest payments on the collateral backing  5-year loans toward accelerated repayment of the TALF loan, with a significantly greater amount diverted in the fourth and fifth year.  We expect that this early repayment will equal about 8 percent of outstanding CMBS loans, resulting in the 
extra haircut I mentioned earlier. If the proposed changes to the program are adopted, we anticipate that about $30 billion in TALF loans collateralized by newly issued CMBS and about $2 billion in loans backed by insurance premium finance ABS will be extended by 
December 31 of this year, when the program is scheduled to end.  If the changes are adopted, we anticipate making a public announcement this Friday. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We will have an opportunity shortly to have a general discussion of these issues, but for right now lets just take any questions that might be for the staff. President Rosengren. 
 MR. ROSENGREN. I have a question on the mortgage-backed-security purchase program, in particular looking at figure 13 and figure 14.  Figure 13 shows that the mortgage rates have come down as you discussed, and whats striking to me is that it looks as though we accounted for roughly 80 percent of the issuance of mortgage-backed securities over the first four months of the year.  If we had been willing to buy 100 percent of the issuance, I assume that we would have been a price setter in that market and we would have had the ability to push rates even further down. So my question is, (A) Is that accurate, and (B) if our guidance to the Desk was to try to get the retail rate between 4 and 4 percent, do you think we would be able to do that for the new issuance?  As youve highlighted, we account for most of the coupon purchases between 4 and 5 percent. So if, instead, we had instructions that were really intending to try to get that rate down, would you be able to hit it? MS. MOSSER. Probably, but at a cost. Right now, even though we are buying a significant proportion of the new issuance, there are others who are buying new issuance as wellfixed-income money managers and a few banks and so forth.  In addition to that, there is a fair amount of trading activity in what I will call off-the-run TBAsthe higher-coupon TBAsas well as in the forward market, both for hedging purposes and for speculation purposes. If we followed that strategy, we would effectively wipe everybody else out of the market.  There wouldnt be any secondary trading.  We would be the only purchaser, and we could probably continue to drive down at least the secondary spreads. MR. ROSENGREN. What does wipe out mean?  Does wipe out mean that they leave the market temporarily and come back in once rates go back up, (if they go back up)? Its not a wipe-out financially; it is just that they are not active in the market. 
   MS. MOSSER. In the short run, they probably take some capital gains, in point of fact.  The big question is when they would come back and how quickly.  The experience of central banks completely taking over markets to the point that the market is effectively shut except for what the central bank is buying is not so pretty from a liquidity standpoint.  For example, in Japan it took a year and a half to get their money market to work again in any kind of normal way, and that was a money market, not a relatively complex product like MBS. I think the big question is, if we completely dominate the trading in this market, we can probably set whatever price we want, but if there are no other buyers that will complicate things for the originators in the following sense.  Originators will have to be very certain about how much were going to buy, the price, and the point at which were going to exit.  As long as theyre very certain about the price and we buy absolutely everything, theyll have no problem originating at low rates. But the minute theres any hint that were not going to buy every last dollar, theres uncertainty about what they can sell to someone else.  At that point its going to be much harder for them to hedge their pipeline, and the spread between the secondary rate and the primary rate may be wider.  So I think theres a concern that perhaps the spread could widen out despite our best efforts to drag the secondary rate down.  The short story is that there is a bit of a tradeoff between how low we can push the secondary-market rate and how much we want to preserve some liquidity in the market so that we have an exit strategy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Could I just follow up on that?  Looking at it from the other side, were focused mostly on new issues.  Is that right? MS. MOSSER. About 85 percent of the TBAs that we buy are between 4 and 5 percent coupons, which is nearly all of the new issuance.  So, yes, were very focused on the new issuance. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why are we doing that instead of mixing new issues and seasoned mortgages? MS. MOSSER. We are buying some seasoned.  I dont know if I have a maturity breakdown in this chart pack, but there is one, I believe, in the balance sheet briefing that we sent around. About 10 percent is off the run. With the two refinancing waves, that part of the market is actually shrinking. Our purchases of high-coupon MBS may not be so big as a share of outstandings, but our market share keeps rising every day because those are exactly the loans that are being prepaid into 4s, 4s, and 5s. So by the end of this refi process, a huge proportion of the market is going to be concentrated between 4 and 5 percentperhaps not 80 percent but we would guess 60 to 70 percent of the marketat which point our numbers will not look so out 
of line. Were just a little ahead of the curve. MR. ROSENGREN. Just to follow up one more time.  If we had given instructions that our goal was to try to get the retail rate between 4 and 4 percent, which is what some of the projections had indicated we might get to, how much more do you think you would have had to purchase to achieve that goal?  And would it have had the undesirable effects that you were talking about? MS. MOSSER. If we had started out purchasing absolutely everything, the answer is that it would have had the undesirable effects. We could have gotten the rate down.  I dont know if I could quantify buying absolutely everything. Its probably not, shall we say, a nice, linear relationship between how much we buy and how far we could have gotten the rate down.  Im guessing that, if we really wanted to get the rate down another 100 basis points, which is what youre talking about here50 to 100 basis points on the retail mortgage ratewe would have 
  had to buy all the new issuance and quite a substantial amount of the outstanding 5s as well.  So we would have had to buy at least 40 to 50 percent more than we did. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. And this is independent of what happens in the Treasury market? MS. MOSSER. The narrower we make the secondary spread to Treasuries, the more everybody else is going to exit the market because nobody else has our funding advantage, shall we say, or our ability to just magically create the dollars to purchase these assets.  If the Treasury yields did not come downand if we focused more on mortgages, presumably they would not 
then the spreads would get so compressed that they would not be attractive to anyone else. MR. FISHER. I want to come back to exhibit 14, about which President Rosengren asked a question. Are these the most up-to-date numbers, including the ones that were reported in the press in the last two days, regarding the budget situation and the likely Treasury issuance? MS. MOSSER. Yes. MR. FISHER. Then I have a question on the last presentation.  I may have missed something, but you added that we would have a collateral gatekeeper. MR. NELSON. Were in the process of hiring at this time.  We dont have someone now, but we are hiring two sorts of vendors right now.  The process is under way, and we anticipate hiring someone next week, I think.  Were looking at whats called a collateral monitor, which will be a number of firms that will help us value collateral that is pledged to us.  We need those professionals in particular for valuing legacy RMBS pledges of collateral, but they will also be able to help us evaluate other collateral, including CMBS, thats brought to us.  Then another function that were hiring for is an expanded collateral custodian. MR. FISHER. So this isnt just for the CMBS market. 
 MR. NELSON. No, it is not. MR. FISHER. Okay. I was a little confused. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto. 
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you. The staff memo on the recommendations for the expansion of the TALF mentions on page 3, in the paragraph on the TALF ceiling and credit support, that you project that the New York Fed will make less than $150 billion in TALF loans through December 31; and in the Bluebook baseline, it looks as though it is about $100 billion at the end of 2009. How confident are you that we can then do $400 billion in 2010, and how important are CMBS to the successful expansion of the TALF? MR. CARPENTER. There are a couple of parts to that question, so I suppose a couple of people will have to answer. For just the baseline projections, we wanted to be illustrative, first and foremost, to give you all a chance to understand what sort of impact different sizes of TALF programs would have on the balance sheet and what that would mean down the line in terms of levels of reserve balances and potential exit strategies.  We intentionally, therefore, did not try to tie it to the operational details that Bill and colleagues are going through in seeing how quickly they would actually be able to arrange deals with specific borrowers for specific types of collateral. Bill, in terms of the detail, I dont know if you or Trish want to comment. MR. NELSON. I would just highlight that this really illustrates the incredible uncertainty about forecasting things like this.  Several months ago we thought that this program would ramp up relatively quickly. We are now observing that it is not doing so, in large part because of things that are themselves hard to predict:  the ability of the primary dealers and the customers to 
work out their legal disagreements and the political concerns of the investors.  If those things were to clear up, this program could move up really quickly, but they may not. 
MS. MOSSER. One parenthetical comment.  On CMBS, our understanding, in talking to the investors and the syndicators, is that the new-issue CMBS are obviously a substantially smaller pool of possible loans and securitizations than the legacy.  Opening it up to legacy actually makes the larger number seem, at least relative to take-up so far, more possible.  If for some reason we would stop with just the current-sized TALF, I think I at least would be surprised if we got to $400 billion.  But if it is opened up to legacy assets, then the possibility of getting the larger numbers is more likely. MS. PIANALTO. Mr. Chairman, this obviously may be an issue for discussion in the policy go-round. But if there is a lack of confidence that we can expand our balance sheet with the TALF program, at what point do we talk about other ways to accomplish this?  Thank you.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you.  I just want to thank Trish Mosser as acting SOMA manager for dispensing her duties with such lan and skill.  As you know, Brian Sack will be joining us as the head of the Markets Group and, subject to the Committees vote, will become the SOMA manager going forward.  But thank you, Trish. MS. MOSSER. Youre welcome.  [Applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Id like to interject my thanks also, Trish, for a wonderful job, and to the staff in general. Our whole system has changed from interest rates to balance sheets and from money supply to lending programs, and I have been very impressed.  I think our colleagues would share my view that the material youve provided to us on the various programs and the analysis that the Board staff has done on their effects have been extremely helpful, and I just want to express my appreciation for that.  President Hoenig. 
  MR. HOENIG. Just a question on the maturity on the TALF.  We want to go from three to five years. That, of course, means that rolling off our balance sheet will be slower.  Is the five years determined by conditions that they told us about or the length of the assets being brought on?  What caused us to move from three to five years? MR. NELSON. I guess its a compromise between what weve heard from market participants about the effectiveness of the program and the feedback from you and others and from the Board on their preferences that the maturity of the loans be kept as short as possible.  So we have discussed in particular whether or not a five-year loan would be more effective than a three-year loan, and we have heard back that it would be appreciably more effective. MR. HOENIG. So the maturity they are really looking for is 10 years. MR. NELSON. They would like for the maturity to be as long as possible. MR. HOENIG. Right, because that is what they are turning over now.  So this would help them.  When they come toward the five years, then they would be pressed pretty hard because they would still have these assets to deal withto refinance and so forth.  Is that right? We will see future pressure as they come against the five years because they need the ten-year length? MR. NELSON. Thats right. 
MR. HOENIG. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I want to express my appreciation to the staff for the comprehensive and voluminous information that they have presented this time about balance sheet projections, breaking out the components and doing a thorough job of presenting the implications for the 
 base, all the components, and the liabilities.  I think its an excellent, comprehensive, and much better framework for the Committee. Mr. Chairman, the staff material presented included a memo that I think Brian Madigan distributed about the simulations. There was one about the interest rate effects, large-scale asset purchases, and other work about the effects of different things.  Would it be safe to assume that theres a later part of our program in which the staff will be discussing that?  If I had questions about the economic effects of changes in our balance sheet for the staff, would that be a more appropriate time to bring it up? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Will you be able to take questions on that after your presentation?  Yes, after the economic presentation. MR. LACKER. Great. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Anyone else? If not, Id like to open the floor for a brief interactive discussion. We have two go-rounds to come, and so theres no need for everyone necessarily to state their views. But I did want to leave open the opportunity so that we can address any issues that are on peoples minds. Let me start.  I want to make just a few preliminary comments.  I will, in fact, be repeating some things that Trish said, which is that, as we look at the time profile of the balance sheet even under our current plan, it is evident that we are going to need various exit strategies.  That is going to be very important.  I want to reiterate that we are working very hardand I will talk specifically in a momentto bring some specifics to the Committee in June. First of all, as I think Brian may discuss, one set of issues relates to winding down or extending existing programs.  Winding down could mean either letting them expiremany of them are slated to end in Octoberor changing the terms over time so that they become less 
   attractive. So in June we will bring to you a set of recommendations from the staff about which programs might be extended over year-end and which might be either allowed to expire or 
modified in some way so that they will naturally shut down.  So thats one element. Second, as Trish was discussing, we have a set of work streams looking at different ways of sterilizing the balance sheet. I want to begin by saying that, although I think it would be prudent for us to assume that we do not have Fed bills or the supplemental financing program from the Treasury, I think in fact theres a reasonable chance that we will get one or the other at least.  The Administration and the Treasury are strongly supportive of Fed bills, and I have gotten some good responses from some key congressmen.  So although it may not be the appropriate moment right now to do that, we will continue to pursue that.  If that doesnt come through, then of course we can go back also to the SFP, which I think under your assumption was not included in the analysis. So thats a direction in which to go. In addition, the staff will continue to work on interest on reserves to make that more effective. I think that there are things we can do.  Trish mentioned a redeposit facility or a term deposit facility, changing the structure of reserve requirements, and other things that we can do to make that more effective.  Another thing we can perhaps do is work with the Treasury to 
manage GSE balances in a better way so that they dont get dumped into the market.  The issue of reverse repos has come up, which would be a way to essentially fund our holdings in the markets other than via excess reserves.  Utilizing the repo markets has the advantage of putting upward pressure on short-term interest rates at the same time that were trying to raise the federal funds rate. So it will have, in some sense, a double effectboth a market effect and an effect on reserve balances. The TALF doesnt look to be likely to go to $1 trillion.  Well see how it evolves. In any case, we have limited at this point the longer-term commitments to $100 billion, 
   and we are looking at possible options for finding different ways to finance the TALF, which also might relieve our balance sheet to some extent.  Then, if necessary, we can sell assets, which in turn would be tightening. So I think these are extraordinarily important.  We need to have a good sense of what our exit strategy is as soon as possible, both because we want to be able to reassure markets and ourselves that we are comfortable with where we are and because, if we do decide to become more aggressive and do additional purchases, we would obviously be much more willing to do that if we were quite confident about our ability to exit in a timely manner.  I just wanted to assure everyone that we are working on those things, and we plan more-extensive presentations in June on all those issues. Let me now just ask:  Does anyone want to comment or raise any issues on this whole set of topics?  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to extend my appreciation to the staff and to you, Mr. Chairman, as well, for your comments just now about the extensive work thats being done. I think its really terrific, and I know that it has been a lot of work and a lot of new ideas on the table, and I just want to extend my appreciation for all the efforts. Mr. Chairman, I do have two questions that Id like to raise.  One is in regard to Fed bills.  As Ive expressed before, I have some trepidation about Fed bills, not because of their economic effect but because of the political ramifications that they may have in terms of a potential invitation for the Congress to express more opinions about what we do with our Fed bills and how we use them.  One way to describe this is to suppose that we propose Fed bills to the Congress, and of course, as weve discussed, your preference would be to have those Fed bills with no strings attachednot subject to debt limits, not subject to oversight by the Congress, and so forth. Its not an unreasonable possibility, for example, that the Congress might come back 
  and say, Were going to give you this, but here are the strings that are going to be attached.  My question is, What would we do in that circumstance?  Would we be forced then to take Fed bills with the strings attached, or would we then turn around and say, Oh, on those terms we dont want it?  If we broach it that way and they come back and say, Well, youve got it, then from a political standpoint they have potentially a lever to call the Federal Reserve before them to talk about either debt ceiling limits or uses of Fed debt in replacing other kinds of public debt.  So Im just wondering if we have a strategy or if we thought about the consequences.  Would we be forced to take it on their terms as opposed to our terms? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me just comment.  Its a very good question. I would first like to make the observation that Fed bills are not an exotic instrument.  We are about the only major central bank that doesnt have this capacity.  I was having a very entertaining conversation with Governor Shirakawa of the Bank of Japan, and he was explaining to me the subtleties.  They have the ability both to take interest on reserves and to issue their own bills and he was saying, Well, it depends whether its two oclock or four oclock in the afternoon, which one is better for fine tuning; and I was saying that I wish I had exactly that kind of flexibility.  But what I perceiveand of course, politics are always difficult to assessis that the resistance that we might get would be less a desire to force us to use Fed bills to support certain credit 
programs but rather the opposite.  I think the concern of the Congress is that it might give us too much unchecked authority, and they might be resistant to doing that.  So one possible compromise that might come up, which might answer your concerns to some extent, would be to 
put a strict time limit in terms of allowing this for the exit strategy but not after that, for example. About strings being attached, obviously strings that compromise monetary policy independence would not be acceptable, and I do think that we have the Administrations support 
 on that issue. For example, if they involved disclosures about programs and things of that sort, if we felt that they were consistent with the effectiveness of those programs and monetary policy independence, those would be the kinds of things we could discuss.  At the end of the meeting tomorrow, Governor Kohn is going to talk about some of our transparency initiatives, things were trying to do that will make us more open in the information we discloseagain, without compromising either the effectiveness of our lending programs or monetary policy independence. So that would clearly be my set of criteria.  But I appreciate your point, and I understand that Fed bills are not necessarily an unadulterated blessing. MR. PLOSSER. Right. The political environments of other central banks that have those arent necessarily the same as our political environment. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, but things are tough all over. 
MR. PLOSSER. My second question, which you havent mentioned, is that Id appreciate any update or thought you have on the inflation-targeting issues that we talked about recently.  Is that a continuing discussion?  And if so, what is its status? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, weve decided that we would like the Administration to affirmatively say, We think this is a good idea.  We think thats a possibility, but theres an awful lot going on right now, and that doesnt seem to be the top priority.  But it certainly is on the agenda. It is still quite alive, and one of the issues would be just when the right time is.  You and I would probably agree that there would be advantages to doing it at some point relatively soon, given the uncertainties about exit strategies, Fed policies, et cetera.  But were going to have to let the crush of events to some extent determine what is the optimal point in doing that.  I think the Administration has considerable interest in supporting this, and as I said, I got fairly 
    good responses from a couple of key congressional people as well.  So I think it is alive, but we should not be too impatient and should wait for it to mature in the fullness of time. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other comments?  Questions?  President Fisher. MR. FISHER. I would like to go back to President Plossers first question, just to understand the politics here.  If we pursue getting approval for Fed bills, which committee do we 
go through to do that? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I would imagine it would be the oversight committeesthe Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in the Senate and the Financial Services Committee in the House. MR. FISHER. For which there is also a lot on their plate. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. True. 
MR. FISHER. I mean, look at the DoddShelby committee, for example.  Having talked with Governor Shirakawa about this just two weeks agotheres enormous political interference in his operations, as you knowI share President Plossers concernnot that its not a good idea, but again, this is enormously complicated, given the other things that are involved.  From a bankers standpoint, Im particularly sensitive given some of the language thats in there.  That, too, is complicatedthat is the point I want to make.  I assume that we are aware of that and are 
trying to maneuver our way through it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I understand that, and as I said, I think we have to plan.  We may have this tool, but we should plan as if we will not have it.  Other comments?  All right.  If there are no other comments, we have a couple of votes to take.  The first is to ratify domestic 
open market operations. 
                                                    PARTICIPANT. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Objection?  I see none.  Second, Trish mentioned very quicklyand you did receive a memothe annual renewal of the swap lines with Mexico and Canada. This has been going on for many years.  I think that they are somewhat redundant at this point, given the other swap lines that we have, but we have maintained this relationship for some time.  Is there any discussion or are there questions about that?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. In the past, the Richmond Bank and I, myself, have had a tradition of voting against these. Earlier this year I did vote in favor of the swap lines that were introduced as part of our management of this crisis.  Im willing to support these, given that a reexamination of these is under way. The distinction in my mind is the association of these particular swap lines with the history of foreign exchange intervention, which has been thought of as fiscal policy and outside the bounds of this institution, quaint as that notion may seem these days.  [Laughter] So Im happy to support this now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Other comments or questions? Could I have a motion?  MR. KOHN. So move. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  Thank you very much.  Lets turn now to the economic situation and Dave Stockton. MR. STOCKTON.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Nathan and I are going to be referring to the two exhibits entitled Recent Economic Indicators.  The question everyone seems to be asking is whether, in the parlance of our Chairman, we are now seeing green shoots in economic developments both here and abroad.  Nathan and I thought that we would take a crack at addressing that question this afternoon.  I should note right up front that my track record for spotting green shoots is not inspiring. While in high school, I had a brief job with a lawn service.  One day while I was riding my tractor, a woman came running out her back door gesticulating wildly. It turns out that the patch of unruly weeds I had just mowed down were, in 3 The materials used by Messrs. Stockton and Sheets are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
      fact, the green shoots of her emerging asparagus garden.  [Laughter] Two weeks later, I was working in a local slaughterhouse.  That life lesson taught me that an inability to distinguish the green shoots from the weeds can have unpleasant consequences for ones career path. Unfortunately, I have found that, over time, the job of making those kinds of distinctions hasnt gotten any easier.  Case in point: The economic data that we have received over the past six weeks have presented a decidedly mixed bag.  To be sure, they stand in sharp contrast to the preceding six months of data that were 
unrelentingly awful. One area in which the incoming data suggest that contraction may be giving way to stabilization is consumer spending.  As shown in the top left 
panel of the first exhibit, real outlays for consumer goods other than motor vehicles plummeted in the second half of last year, knocking more than 2 percentage points off the change in real GDP.  More recently, spending appears to have flattened out.  The data are noisy on a monthly basis and subject to sizable revisions, so any 
conclusion that declines here have ended would be premature.  Still, the consumer sector is looking better today than it did earlier this year.  Housing also may be stabilizing, or at least not falling as rapidly as it had been earlier.  Sales have steadied a bit in recent months, and single-family starts and permitsshown in the panel to the righthave flattened out thus far this year.  But as this chart makes clear, there have been other instances of relative stability over the past couple of years that proved not to be durable. Similarly, the steep declines in motor vehicle production that occurred last fall and into this winter may be over, and a small uptick in production seems to be under way. As seen in the middle left chart, the automakers slashed production in the fourth and first quarters in response to the weakening of sales and excess inventories.  Production moved up some in February and March and was scheduled at a pace of 
about 6 million units for the second quarter.  Given the lingering inventory overhang in this sector, we had assumed in the Greenbook an underbuild of about 0.5 million 
units. The announcement of production cuts by GM after we closed our forecast 
suggests that we were leaning in the right direction.  Indeed, given that announcement, we would be inclined to take another 400,000 units off the forecast of 
motor vehicle production in the second quarter.  That, in turn, would lower our current-quarter GDP forecast about  percentage point.  But as can be seen by the red dot, even with that adjustment, motor vehicle production is likely to be a small positive for current-quarter growth rather than being a substantial subtraction, as it had been in the preceding two quarters. As shown in the panel to the right, outside motor vehicles, manufacturing output continued to contract sharply through March, with the declines widespread.  At this 
point, we have a few regional purchasing managers surveys that are pointing to some lessening in the rate of decline in the factory sector.  But with inventorysales ratios high, our expectation is that manufacturing IP will continue to drop appreciably in coming months.  We received orders and shipments for nondefense capital goods 
(plotted in the bottom left panel) after we completed the Greenbook.  Those data were 
   very close to our expectations and consistent with our view that equipment spending will continue to decline rapidly this year.  Likewise, the available information suggests activity in the nonresidential construction sector remains on a steep downtrend. In brief, there are few green shoots among the indicators of capital spending. But the biggest single challenge to our view that the pace of contraction in aggregate activity is lessening comes from the labor market.  Initial claims for 
unemployment insurance (plotted in the bottom right panel) have moved up further on net since the last employment report, pointing to another sizable decline in payroll employment this month.  Other labor market indicators are similarly bleak.  Undaunted, we are forecasting some gradual lessening in the pace of job loss in coming months.  But that is pure forecast, based on our assessment that the decline in aggregate output is, in fact, abating. I should note that, even if we are right and the rate of decline in aggregate output is diminishingor, in another of the days favorite phrases, the second derivative of activity is turning positivethat isnt setting the bar very high. We could be correct about the sign of the second derivative, but if we are in the process of shifting from a 6 percent rate of contraction to, say, a 4 percent rate of contraction, then the look and feel of this economy will not be much different in coming months than it has been over the past six months. For now, we read the balance of the data as suggesting that the intensity of the recession is letting up some and that, indeed, activity has been a bit firmer than we 
had projected in March. Some of the modest upward revision that we made to the forecast of activity in the first half of this year reflected the upward surprises in consumption and housing that I mentioned earlier.  But as Nathan will discuss 
shortly, we have also been surprised by a plunge in imports.  While it would be hard to chalk that up as good news, it does imply that the weakness in domestic demand that we observed in recent months has fallen more on foreign producers and less on domestic producers than we had previously estimated. If the modest upward surprises in the economic data were the only information that we had received over the intermeeting period, the revisions to our forecast beyond the current quarter would have been small, and we would likely have continued to project a contraction in aggregate activity through the end of the year.  But as you know from reading the Greenbook, we revised up our projection of real GDP growth in the second half of this year and in 2010 about 1 percentage point at an annual rate. That upward adjustment reflects almost entirely the improvement in financial conditions of late.  Equity prices in this forecast are nearly 20 percent above the levels anticipated at the time of the March Greenbook.  The 30-year fixed-rate conventional mortgage is about 35 basis points lower than we had been expecting.  The triple-B corporate bond yield is down about 50 basis points, and junk bond yields are down considerably more.  At the same time, since the March Greenbook the broad nominal dollar has fallen roughly 3 percent, providing additional impetus to demand for domestic production. As you know, we have been monitoring measures of financial stress and the results of the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey to gauge changes in financial 
     conditions that operate outside the normal interest rate, asset price, and exchange rate channels captured by our models.  These measures also have improved of late and have led us to make some additional upward adjustment to our projection this round.  The improvement in financial conditions in recent weeks is unquestionably good news. But we are uneasy that a forecast revision of this dimension rests so heavily on readings from financial markets, which at several points over the past two and half years have shown signs of stabilization that proved short-lived.  And principally because there are no signs of improvement in the labor market, we still view the risks 
to our forecast has more heavily weighted to the downside.  That said, for the first time in a long while, we are experiencing developments that give some shape to the upside risks to the forecast.  Better economic news and improving financial conditions, such as weve seen in recent weeks, could feed back on each other more powerfully than we have allowed for in the baseline forecast, producing a stronger recovery. For now, our best guess is that the contraction in activity will continue through midyear, that output will roughly stabilize in the second half, and that something that begins to feel like a recovery will get under way by the middle of next year.  The basic factors influencing this trajectory will be familiar.  The inventory cycle plays 
out, with the liquidation of stocks lessening over this year and turning to a small 
accumulation next year.  Housing bottoms out in response to improving affordability.  Fiscal stimulus provides support to consumer spending and to cash-strapped state and local governments.  Monetary policy remains accommodative, and financial markets and institutions continue to heal gradually, providing support to household and business spending. As Nathan will discuss, similar improvements are expected to become evident in foreign economies. Turning to the inflation forecast, after three consecutive months in which core PCE prices were unchanged, we have now had three months in which those prices rose about 0.2 percent per month.  We think there are some good reasons to average 
across this period, and that is close to what we have done in this forecast.  For one, the price changes late last year were especially low for goods prices.  There were widespread reports that the exceptional weakness in sales last fall had led to deep 
discounting by retailers. As sales firmed early this year and merchandisers made some progress in working off inventories, those discounts have reportedly been reduced. This may be one of the rare instances in which the anecdotes and the data are in reasonable accord. A second factor helping to explain the pattern has been the behavior of nonmarket prices, which posted very small increases late last year and larger increases of late. As you know, we dont attach much signal to the movements in these prices. Our basic take on the data is that there has been some deceleration in core consumer prices over the past year.  On a 12-month change basis, the change in core PCE prices appears to have slowed from a pace of about 2 percent a year ago to a pace of just under 2 percent by March of this year.  Looking ahead, we expect some further deceleration in core inflation, to 1 percent for 2009 as a whole and  percent 
      in 2010. Sizable economic slack and reduced cost pressures associated with the earlier declines in the prices of energy and other commodities should put downward pressure on price inflation over the next two years.  We have a little less disinflation in this forecast than in March owing to the somewhat stronger economy, the weaker dollar, and higher oil prices. But for the most part, the trajectory remains the same. We continue to see large risks on both sides of our projection of inflation.  On the downside, most of the econometric models that we follow project greater disinflation, with many forecasting inflation to move below zero.  Even if the slope of the 
aggregate supply curve is relatively shallow, an output gap of 6 to 7 percent can exert 
noticeable downward pressure on price inflation.  Moreover, these models expect an extended period of low actual price inflation to result in a downward movement in inflation expectations.  These mechanisms are at work in the baseline forecast, but 
more faintly than in the models.  The chief reason is that we are skeptical that inflation expectations will drop as much as suggested by most of these models.  We have seen little movement in measures of longer-term inflation expectations over the past six months despite rising unemployment and declining commodity prices.  Indeed, an important upside risk to our forecast is that there is no material retreat in inflation expectations and, consequently, less disinflation going forward than we currently project.  Nathan will continue our presentation. MR. SHEETS. Like the domestic forecast, our outlook for growth in the foreign economies is a little stronger than in the previous Greenbookup about  percentage point on average throughout the forecast period.  We estimate that output abroad contracted sharply in the first quarter of this year, matching the fourth quarters 7 percent drop. We expect real GDP in the second quarter to contract a further 2 percent at an annual ratewhich, although representing some moderation in the pace of decline, would still be the worst quarterly outcome in four decades were it not for the plunges recorded in the two previous quarters.  Our working hypothesis is that foreign growth will gradually rebound, turning slightly positive in the second half of 
this year before recovering more earnestly next year.  Consistent with this forecast, we believe that some early signs of stabilization around the world are starting to emerge, although the evidence on this score is admittedly mixed. Your international exhibit shows some data that have informed our thinking.  As in the United States, equity prices around the world (the top left panel) have moved up since the time of your last meeting, potentially suggesting that some severe outcomes may now be seen as less likely.  These gains in stock prices were led by a rebound in financial sector equities. More broadly, global financial stress appears to 
have receded some:  LIBOROIS spreads, CDS premiums, and corporate bonds spreads have all posted declines. The spot price of WTI has risen to around $50 per barrel, up about $7 per barrel since the March Greenbook.  Other commodity prices have also increased, albeit by smaller amounts.  In the case of oil, the rise likely reflects OPECs aggressive production cuts of 3 million barrels a day since September.  But with a broad array of commodity prices showing increases, the rise may also signal a stronger outlook for global demand for commodities. 
       In the advanced foreign economies, the recent news on activity has been mixed.  Industrial production, shown in the middle left panel, has continued to sink, and unemployment rates have moved up more.  The Japanese economy experienced a particularly sharp decline in the first quarter, with GDP plummeting an estimated 18 percent at an annual rate, an even steeper drop than in the fourth quarter.  For other advanced foreign economies, the rate of contraction is estimated to have also steepened in the first quarter, albeit less dramatically.  However, some recent survey data show signs of an incipient slowing in the rate of contraction.  Purchasing 
managers indexes and some other surveys have tended to edge up over the last month or two. These surveys remain below 50 and thus indicate further contraction but at a slower pace.  That said, the picture is far from uniform; for example, Japans Tankan survey (not shown) sank in the first quarter to its lowest level on record. In emerging Asia and Latin America, we see a little more evidence that the sharp drop in activity may be letting up.  As in the advanced economies, most purchasing managers index surveys suggest some abating in the rate of contraction, and Chinas PMI indicates that the expansion has resumed.  Many of the sharpest declines in 
output were in economies that were heavily exposed to the collapse in world trade.  The bottom middle panel shows that exports in some countries have ticked up 
somewhat or flattened out, although they are still at very low levels.  To varying degrees, industrial production has also bottomed out in China, Korea, Brazil, and Mexico. Perhaps most notably, Chinas GDP release for the first quarter surprised us on the upside, with growth reboundingby our reckoningto roughly 6 percent at 
an annual rate, up from just 1 percent in the fourth quarter.  We see this bounceback as suggesting that the substantial stimulus that the authorities have put in place may be working more quickly than we had anticipated.  But we underscore our standard disclaimers about the reliability of the Chinese data. At the time of the last Greenbook, our decision to write down a forecast that called for the pace of contraction to ease during the second quarter was largely an act of faith. We are now a little more confident in this regard.  In addition to the early glimmers of hope in the data, governments and central banks around the world continue to actively combat the weakness in demand with fiscal and monetary stimulus.  More central banks in the advanced economies have neared the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, and others have maintained or expanded their unconventional measures.  Central banks in emerging-market economies have been 
able to lower their policy rates as well.  Moreover, the recent commitment by the G-20 leaders to increase the IMFs lending capacity and the introduction of the 
Funds new flexible credit line appear to have diminished the downside risks facing the emerging-market economies. Based on these developments, the overall tone of our international forecast has notched up from one of unmitigated terror in March to just very deep anxiety at present. Suffice it to say that we still see many risks:  The recent data have been mixedwith those ticking up only having done so for a month or two; financial 
                                                       4 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). market conditions are still fragile; and it remains to be seen whether the macro policy responses that have been put in place will be sufficient to stem the ongoing declines in private spending.  Moreover, the recent outbreak of swine flu poses potentially serious downside risks to economic activity, particularly in Mexico. The global recession is having a profound effect on U.S. trade.  We now estimate that both exports and imports dropped an astonishing annual rate of 31 percent in the first quarter, with imports more than 11 percentage points weaker than projected in March. Together these changes add 1 percentage point to U.S. GDP growth in the first quarter. February imports were held down partly by production disruptions associated with the Lunar New Year in Asia, but West Coast port data for March suggest a rebound. Auto trade, especially imports, should bounce back some  following North American production shutdowns earlier this year.  That said, the ongoing disruptions in the auto sector are likely to generate further fluctuations in trade flows in coming months.  Also, notably, the ISM series for export orders has inched up from its December low. Since the March Greenbook, the broad nominal dollar has fallen roughly 3 percent. This depreciation has come  in response to a number of developments, including the FOMCs March announcement that it would ramp up asset purchases, the smaller-than-expected cut in the ECBs policy rate early this month, and signs of diminished risk aversionwhich have tended to support EME currencies.  Despite this depreciation over the past six weeks or so, the broad dollar is still up more than 2 percent since the end of last year. Going forward, the decline in the dollar and higher foreign growth have raised our projection for exports, and the stronger outlook for the United States has lifted our forecast for imports as well. But even after these upward revisions, the outlook for trade is still quite weak, with exports continuing to contract through the third quarter and import growth remaining soft.  Net exports, after adding a little more than 
 percentage point to the change in GDP in the second quarter, are projected to subtract  percentage point on average in the second half of this year and in 2010.  All told, while signs of stabilization might very well be appearing, they do not change our view that the global recovery will most likely be slow and tentative.  In the realm  of green shoots, our forecast is much more like a small potted plant or a vulnerable asparagus garden than a large leafy tree.  [Laughter] Brian will now continue our 
presentation. MR. MADIGAN.4  I will be referring to the separate package labeled Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants Economic Projections.  Exhibit 1 tabulates the central tendencies and ranges of your latest projections.  Corresponding information 
about your January projections is indicated in italics, and April Greenbook projections are included as memo items.  As shown in the top left portion of the table, your forecasts for real GDP growth in 2009 have a central tendency of minus 2 to minus 1 percent.  That is a downward shift of about  percentage point from  
   January, reflecting markdowns to your forecasts for both the first and the second halves of this year. Most of you now anticipate that output will contract at an annual rate of 3 to 4 percent during the first half of this year.  Almost all of you see 
positive growth during the second half, albeit generally at a low rate, reflecting slow and uneven improvement in financial conditions, some stabilization in the housing sector, and stimulative monetary and fiscal policies.  Consistent with the downward revision to near-term GDP growth, each of you revised up your projection of the unemployment rate for late this year; the central tendency of your forecasts for 
unemployment in the fourth quarter of 2009 is now 9.2 to 9.6 percent, an upward shift of about  percentage point from your January projections. Looking further ahead, all of you project a pickup in economic growth in 2010, as financial conditions continue to normalize, and robust growth in 2011.  Consequently, you expect that the unemployment rate will be trending down during those years.  But 
each of you indicates that the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2011 is likely to be well above your estimate of the long-run equilibrium unemployment rate.  As shown in the exhibit, the central tendency of your projections for unemployment in late 2011 is 7 to 8 percent, whereas the central tendency for the longer-run 
equilibrium unemployment rate, just to the right of the dotted line, is 4 to 5 percent. Turning to inflation, shown in the lower half of the table, all of you see slower headline and core inflation this year than in recent years; the central tendency of your projections for headline PCE inflation in 2009 is 0.6 to 0.9 percent.  About three-quarters of you project that inflation will remain at or below your view of mandate consistent inflation through 2011. But reflecting the diversity of models of inflation dynamics in use among economists and central bankers, some of you see inflation 
slowing through 2011 in response to a persistently high degree of economic slack, whereas several of you see inflation rising above your estimate of mandate consistent inflation in 2011 or even in 2010 as inflation expectations respond to rapid expansion of the Federal Reserves balance sheet.  The central tendency of your 
projections for headline inflation in 2011 is 1.0 to 1.9 percent; the range, at 0.5 to 2.5 percent, is much wider. Your views on the outlook for this year and next are broadly similar to the staffs view: Greenbook projections for real GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation for 2009 and 2010 are all within the central tendencies of your projections.  That similarity breaks down in 2011:  About two-thirds of you predict both higher unemployment and noticeably higher inflation in that year than does the Greenbook.  Indeed, several of you noted explicitly that you do not share the staffs view of inflation dynamics.  That divergence in views may help explain why about half of you anticipate that it will be necessary to begin moving the federal funds rate up in 2011 or even in 2010, appreciably earlier than envisioned by the Greenbook, which assumes that the federal funds rate will remain close to the zero bound through 2012.  
None of you changed your views on the mandate consistent inflation rate in this round: The central tendency remains 1 to 2 percent, and the range remains 1 to 
   2 percent. Three of you are at 1 percent, two are at 1 percent, and twelve are at 2 percent. As shown by exhibit 2, your views on the uncertainties and risks in your projections have not changed appreciably since January.  Almost all of you again see greater-than-usual uncertainty in your projections of both growth and inflation, reflecting the unusual nature of the shocks that triggered the current recession and our limited experience with unconventional policy tools.  Most of you continue to judge that the risks to growth are tilted to the downside (and those to unemployment tilted 
to the upside) but that risks to inflation are roughly balanced.  Some of you note that you see the near-term risks as tilted to the downside but see the risks to growth in 
your outyear forecasts as roughly balanced, whereas several of you stated that the rapid expansion of the Federal Reserves balance sheet will shift inflation risks to the upside going forward. In short, your current projections show a deeper recession in 2009 than did your January projections but not a longer recession.  Your projections continue to show a 
recovery starting later this year.  Most of you still expect the recovery to be sluggish initially but to gain traction in 2010 and to pick up steam in 2011.  Even so, none of 
you thinks that the economy will have returned to full employment by the end of 2011. Most of you expect inflation to remain subdued, but the range of views on the outlook for inflation in 2011 remains wide.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Are there questions for Dave, Nathan, or Brian?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Yes. I would like to ask a question about the effect of our balance sheet expansion on the economy. I notice that the staff has come around to the view that purchases of Treasuries or MBS are likely to have roughly equal, similar magnitude, effects on a range of interest rates. As I have argued, that is the natural place to start.  A couple of points in some of the staff material mentioned that the amount of reserves on bank balance sheets could crowd out private lending. I wanted to explore that a bit because it is at the core of our struggles to figure out just how the stimulus of a larger balance sheet works.  I take it that the way your analysis works is that microeconomically, market by market, Treasuries do this and MBS do that, based on the ratios that you calculate, and you estimate the effects that way.  But on bank lending, wouldnt it be the case that the Treasuries or the MBS that we purchased would free up space on 
 private-sector balance sheets that would crowd in private lending in an amount equal to the amount that the increase in reserves on bank balance sheets would crowd out private lending? MR. MADIGAN. I think to some degree that would be true.  The question is, to some degree, where the Treasuries come from, at least in terms of focusing on your question about the leverage ratio. If they are coming predominantly from the banking sector, that may have the effect you are talking about. But if they are coming from outside the banking sector, where capital ratios are less important, that wont have the effect relative to the leverage ratio that you mentioned. MR. LACKER. Well, let me follow that up.  Lets say it all comes from outside the banking sector. Then you have all these folks outside the banking sector, and they all have bank deposits because we buy these through banks. So the liability side of all the banks has gone up.  As a first step, that doesnt change the capital ratio, but the traditional sort of money market buyers story, that traditional mechanism, has banks, when they have more reserves relative to deposits than they want, lending it out and scaling up their balance sheet.  And while the standard money-and-banking textbook leaves bank capital aside, the natural extension is that they are able to bid for capital in the appropriate ratio to the size of their balance sheet. Granted, some banks are currently holding lots of these reserves and are having difficulty raising private-sector capital now and are not in a strong position to increase the balance sheet.  But there is the rest of the banking sector, and the reserves can easily be lent to them and find their way through the usual mechanism.  So it seems as though there ought to be the opportunity for that inflow of deposits to finance itself. That is just a one-for-one effect.  Then, on top of that, you have the potential for a multiplier effect.  Right? 
 The reason I ask about this is that the usual prediction would have been that this amount of reserves would have just led to an explosion in M2, an explosion of lending, and a burst of inflation. You mentioned at the beginning that one way to think about this is, well, we are buying Treasuries from banks, so they are holding more reserves, but we are on the flat part of the demand curve because of interest on reserves.  So what we are adding in reserves is a perfect substitute for what we are taking outshort-term Treasury bills.  But banks holdings of Treasuries, agencies, and MBS, which are all presumably perfect substitutes, have gone up $200 billion. So it doesnt seem as though it is the case that we are just engineering a substitution of reserves for debt on bank balance sheets.  It seems as though banks have substantially increased their demand for liquid assets.  That seems to explain why we arent getting this money multiplier effect.  But, then, we are going to run up reserves to $2 trillion, 
$2 trillion. What if we take this baseline assumption that reserves are a perfect substitute, at the interest rate on reservesfor short-term Treasuries, agency debt, and MBS, sayand we run up reserves to $2 trillion?  Arent we going to run through banks?  I mean, unless their demand for liquid assets rises, arent we going to just push through that? And how are we going to think about what happens to bank balance sheets? MR. MADIGAN. I dont know what you mean by push through.   MR. LACKER. Well, they are holding reserve balances of $800 billion, $900 billion, plus $1.2 trillion in the stuff that is kind of a perfect substitute for it.  We are going to make reserves bigger than that sum.  So something has to give, and we struggle with what that is going to be and what kind of stimulative effect that might have. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Part of the experience from Japan is that the Bank of Japan had a hope that that would happenthat in effect at some point you pile up enough excess reserves 
 that banks just dont want them anymore and they begin to lend them.  So it begins to operate the way that you say. But it didnt in Japan. The experienceat least the way we have read itwas that it never happened. So if we go back a few months, when we started thinking about how expanding the balance sheet might work, and go back to the list of things that we sent the Committee in December, the mechanism you just described was on the list of Could it work this way? Weve learned a lot from the experience of Japan and have taken a lesson from itthat it seems as though you can run up excess reserves to a tremendous amount and the banks will just accept it. What came up this time was a twist that I had never thought of beforeIm definitely not the expert in this room on this; Brian can speak to itthe sense of how it actually could begin to work in the other direction.  Because of the way leverage ratios, for example, are calculated, the banks might actually get so uncomfortable with so many reserves that they would actually begin to cut back on lending.  I dont know that weve seen that either.  We havent, but 
that was a sort of perverse effect like this that the Japanese began to worry about. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Couldnt you just as well argue that, if they ran into that constraint, theyd want to get rid of the reserves and lend them out? MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. But then the problem is that it doesnt help.  But thats a problem in the capital position. MR. MADIGAN. I think the question is whether the banking system as a whole is acting as though its constrained by capital and whether we expect that it will continue.  Now, we certainly think that thats the case.  Bank credit overall is contracting pretty markedly, and of course, we all know about very low bank share prices and the difficulties in raising capital.  So I think the implicit assumption here is that, at least for some time going forward, the banking sector as a whole will remain capital constrained.  I agree that there is some scope for shifting 
 credit around among banks, but at least the current experience with the behavior of banks strongly suggests that the system as a whole is constrained. MR. LACKER. Well, the runoff of bank credit by itself doesnt speak to whether or not they are capital constrained. I mean, lots of people report a decline in demand. MR. MADIGAN. No. Most people are not wanting the assets. MR. LACKER. Weve discussed this before at a few meetings:  Nobody is as creditworthy as they were two years ago, and there have been widespread reports of declining demand for credit, even in the Greenbook this time as well. MR. MADIGAN. I agree. Its both demand and supply for bank credit, but we have very strong experience that the supply of bank credit is contracting. MR. LACKER. But the Japan experienceI mean, there must be some limit to this, right? MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Well, they took it a long way.  Now, it could be that demand for credit was imploding enough that the Bank of Japan just never took it far enough, but the Bank of Japan took it an awfully long way. We thought that a distinction between what they did and what we have been doing is that we are targeting liquidity support operations toward particular sectorsmarkets that are having severe problemsor, alternatively, trying to do a major twist on the yield curve to drive down long ratesso two things that they didnt really try at the scale that were trying. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have two-handers from Governor Kohn and President Yellen. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Of course, if the banks lend it out, it doesnt destroy the reserves. If they started lending it out, which would be great, their whole balance 
 sheet would rise, and an individual bank might see that it had substituted one asset for another.  But the banking system cant get rid of the reserves.  My question is whether lowering the interest rate on excess reserves would help the process that President Lacker was talking about.  Part of the problemwell, maybe it is not a problemso part of the phenomenon is that they can earn 25 basis points on a totally risk-free asset, so the incentive for them to look for alternative assets and set in motion the sort of traditional transmission mechanism that President Lacker was talking about is somewhat damped by that. MR. MADIGAN. I think the question is how much.  Surely it goes in that direction.  In evaluating the riskreturn tradeoff from holding reserves or making a commercial loan at LIBOR plus 200 or some other basis, theres a big difference between those returns.  You wonder whether lowering the relevant rate of either 25 basis points on excess reserves or the federal funds rate from 15 basis points further down really is going to make a very big difference.  One of the costs you have to trade off in making that judgment is whether you are concerned at all about the market effects that would surely come about on the federal funds rate amid all the things we talked about previously regarding the possible impairment of market function.  Now, there are possible offsets to that.  Trish already mentioned the change in the new fails penalty, for instance, which might help deal with at least one of those issues. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Just a quick comment.  Ive also been worried about the leverage ratio issue and whether or not it might mean that our long-term asset purchases have a perverse effect.  Looking at leverage ratios for various large banking organizations, they dont seem very close to 
the regulatory minimums.  On the other hand, I thought you had reported to us that the major reason that interest on reserves had failed to provide a floor for the federal funds rateafter all, 
  the question is why banking organizations dont borrow at the federal funds rate and then hold them and earn a higher return by keeping it in their accounts and earning interest on reserves was concern about leverage ratios and leverage ratios beginning to bind. I thought that perhaps you mentionedI cant recall where I heard thisthat large banks have been asked why they arent doing that. If Im right that concerns about leverage was their answer, then it gives me greater concern about this issue. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish. MS. MOSSER. One change in behavior, though, from the very first implementation of interest rates on excess reserves back in the fall, whether it was a learning curve, getting our systems up to date, or whateverChris can correct me if Im wrong on thisthe major 
downward pressure on the funds rate now is due to the trading by the GSEs, which dont get the 25 basis points. Theyre not eligible for it. In fact, the trading between banks is actually quite small right now. MS. YELLEN. Why cant the large banks borrow in the funds market from the GSEs and hold the proceeds in their account and arbitrage that out?  I understand that the GSEs cant 
earn interest on reserves, but it seems like a pure arbitrage opportunity. MS. MOSSER. They can simply buy it and hold it, but that doesnt show up in the reported funds rate. The reported federal funds rate that you see every day is on the broker trading volume, and the vast majority of the people who bother to trade are the GSEs. MR. BURKE. The GSEs are selling fed funds, and banks are buying them, holding them, and arbitraging the rate as youre suggesting. But roughly speaking, 80 percent of the brokered volume that were seeing in fed funds is GSE sales.  So in terms of what were seeing as actual rates being reported and why those rates are where they are, I believe its a function of  GSEs 
     selling and banks buying, where banks buy at 15 and hold at 25 and make that arbitrage.  But that doesnt answer the question of why more banks arent buying more and then lending and making an even bigger spread.  The anecdotal evidence that the Desk has gotten from the banks is that its a leverage ratio constraint. MS. YELLEN. And thats whats feeding my concern about this leverage issue. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is a good issue for us to look at more carefully.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. If I could just comment on thisjust two things.  First, President Yellen, the way Id reconcile it in my mind is that the first part of your question sounded as though you were thinking about the leverage ratio with a fixed amount of capital as constraining your balance sheet and what I think Chris Burke replied was that the gist of what weve heard from banks is that they act as if theres a shadow value that they have to earn on that arbitrage.  Imposed internally on their trading desk is the shadow price on their capital, and I dont think that those two are inconsistent.   Then Governor Kohn talked about lowering the interest rate on reserves.  I guess I think about banks as choosing, taking the interest rate on reserves and a bunch of other interest rates as given, how much they want to hold; and for us to put more out there is going to require some interest rate other than the interest rate on reserves to adjust.  Thats different from the usual situation in which, when we increase reserves, you go down this demand curve, and the federal 
funds rate itself changes.  Here its essentially the price of substitutes.  So repo rates, reverse 
repo rates, and the yields on agency debt would be the first things that ought to change to induce them to want to meet their demand for liquid assets via reserve balances rather than agencies or what have you. I think that more insight into that would be really useful.  Let me just point out 
  that your work on the effect of large-scale asset purchases entirely ignores all of this.  Its as if it doesnt matter how we finance these purchases, whether by bank reserves, Fed bills, or what have you. That makes me a little uncomfortable in placing too much weight on them in these simulations. Let me finally mention that what motivates all of this is how we know were going to be doing enoughPresident Pianaltos question.  How do we know if weve done too much? How do we know, looking at this, when to reverse course?  And how do we know when demand by banks for reserves is pulling back and theyre about to try to lend them out to get rid of them and set off an expansion in M2 in lending?  These are tough questions, and I think, Mr. Chairman, supplementing your outline of work going forward with some analytical work on this issue that uses our insight into bank balance sheets and bank balance sheet management would be useful.  Thank you very much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think those are solvable problems.  President Evans, youve been waiting. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions, but first, I want to thank the staff for a very careful, thorough investigation of the role of inflation expectations in the simulations, and the simulations in general.  I dont think this is a very important issue for today, but in terms of the modeling strategy, I was somewhat surprised about the way that you came out in favor of the adaptive expectations for modeling medium- or long-term inflation expectations.  Especially at a time when were concerned about the possibilities that our extraordinary monetary expansions might make some people uncomfortable with the expectations, I thought that you would at least have a channel in there that we could activate and see how that affects 
   things. As I say, I dont think its really very important for discussion today, but it will be as we start going forward on that.  I dont know if you want to comment. MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think we made a change, as youve said, this time.  We also said in the memo that we were continuing to work on it.  We are definitely leaving it open.  I hope it was clear from the memo where we are.  Were very uncertain about it, and at the moment we have a number of people working on trying to figure out a new way.  There are a couple of things. First, I suspect that you probably will be changing things over time.  Where we locked it in this time is just for the moment. Second, I assume that, as we go forward, we will continue to do the sort of thing weve done in the past, which is to present you with alternative ways of thinking and alternative ways of how this might play out.  Even when were through the episode, we probably wont be able to tell exactly what truth is.  But certainly as were going through the episode and we definitely dont know what truth is, were going to provide alternatives. MR. EVANS. Right. I appreciate the effort, and I thought it was very well done, very careful. The second question, in terms of the Greenbook analysiswell, the forecastis if you could clarify a bit the way that you make assumptions about the credit environment.  I know that you have special factors during this periodyou have the principal components from a few different surveysand I think that thats very helpful.  Its not a surprise that I would favor something like that.  I guess the question is, coming through the bank stress test and if there are concerns that the banks that are going to have to take the additional capital and theyre unhappy about this and theyd like to get out from under it, its not quite clear to me that they will try to lend a great deal on the basis of the additional capital.  Its sort of insurance against future losses. So we might be facing additional credit squeeze conditions.  How important is that for this 
   Greenbook forecast?  How is it incorporated as a potential risk?  In thinking about the financial factors, I know the forecast has exogenous and endogenous components as to how theyll run off, but I doubt that it incorporates that type of risk factor.  Is that right? MR. STOCKTON.  You are correct.  It doesnt. Were using several imperfect measures of financial stress to fix a misspecified model.  So the exact kinds of concern that you have about the bank channel into overall lending and spending are really missing from the staffs large-scale model. What were trying to do is gauge some of these imperfect measuresfirst, from some measures from the capital markets and principal components of various measures of volatility, spreads, and so forth and, second, from the principal components of the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  Were still going to have to apply a lot of additional judgment to the forecast going forward as we see bank lending conditions changing in ways that maybe those measures are not capturing. I just think this is just one additional area that were going to be struggling with going forward. MR. EVANS. But it does seems likely that, if there were a less-than-positive reaction and the various spreads started to back up, we would see this in the indicators that youre looking at, and that would have a natural type of damping effect on the forecast.  So some of it would be accommodated, and then some would be more judgmental. MR. STOCKTON. Wed be capturing more as it was happening, but I think that our ability to forecast what is going to happen is severely limited. MR. EVANS. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, my question is on a different part of the credit markets, and thats the bond marketsprivate debt.  If I recall correctly in the Bluebook, we have had an 
impactthere has been a response or at least an actionand the spreads have narrowed somewhat.  Issuance is robust or such, relatively speaking.  My question is, Where do we think its going?  Obviously its not going to cap-ex.  I presume this is the question.  Its going into paying down bank debt or replacing short-term debt.  Is that correct? And if thats correct, do we have a sense whether this is significant in terms of the impact on the economy? MS. MOSSER. To the extent that its paying down higher-cost debt MR. FISHER. Short-term debt. 
MS. MOSSER. Aside from paying down short-term debt, its reducing their liquidity risk and taking pressure off money markets.  To the extent that it is replacing more-expensive bank debt and loans with corporate debt that less expensive and long-term and so less expensive in the duration sensethen thats additional cash for the corporation.  So its a pretty classic recession shift in composition in the corporate bond market, when cap-ex is usually declining.  I dont know that what theyre doing now is particularly atypical given how slow economic activity is.  If and when the economy turns the corner, the composition of the corporate bond market will tend to be a follower, not a leader.  So cap-ex will determine the way out, rather than the ability to get funds determining cap-ex, at least at this point in the business cycle. MR. STOCKTON. But in terms of the changes that weve made in the forecast, that lower cost of capital is implicit in the decline in corporate bond yields and is an important factor that we built in here. Now, that doesnt prevent capital spending from continuing to contract, but its contracting more slowly because the cost of capital is lower than it otherwise would have been. So it is leaving an imprint in our outlook. MR. FISHER. Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? Okay. If not, its 4:00 p.m. I understand that coffee is ready. Why dont we take a 20-minute break.  Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Were ready to begin with our economic go-round.  Let me start with President Rosengren.  Eric, when youre ready. MR. ROSENGREN. There have been some initial signs that the recession may be approaching a trough.  It is too soon to tell whether the trough of the recession has truly been reached. Whenever we do reach the trough, the economic recovery is likely to be anemic.  Consumers have experienced significant wealth loss despite the rebound in the stock market since March, and consumption is likely to be restrained by further job losses.  The rising fraction of homeowners who find themselves underwater makes it difficult for them to move around, and 
unless job prospects improve, they are going to have a difficult time moving.  These continued constraints in the recovery have influenced my forecast for the economy.  I expect unemployment to peak somewhat higher than in the Greenbook and improvements in the labor market to be more gradual than in the Greenbook.  The significant slack in the labor markets will continue to place a lot of downward pressure on inflation, and there remains a significant risk 
that deflation will not be avoided. I continue to believe that the risks around this outlook remain on the downside.  My primary concerns are that the reaction to the stress test is unpredictable.  Contacts through the AMLF have noted that they are concerned that the stress test could lead to downgrades in asset-backed commercial paper to below the A1/P1, rendering them ineligible for the AMLF program.  In addition, they note that money market funds have been more transparent with their public holdings so that there could be another surge in redemptions for money market funds that hold 
  paper and for banks that perform poorly on the stress test.  Second, I have my own concerns about the results of the stress test. President Evanss question highlighted that institutions undergoing the stress test may behave more as if they are capital constrained than they would in the absence of the stress test. I share that concern.  I think there is a very strong desire right now to avoid government capital infusions, and that desire seems to only be growing. Even banks that do not have the mandatory convertible preferred (MCP) are likely to be affected. Banks outside the 19 banks undergoing the stress test will pursue the same conservative asset-producing strategies, concerned that the same criteria might be applied to them.  Among the 19 that will not need the MCP, it may be rational to slow their own organic growth so that they can take advantage of asset sales or acquisition opportunities.  If I am right and the structure of the stress-test program discourages the expansion of lending, all business lending, particularly commercial real estate lending, could be adversely affected.  Contacts with insurance firms note that insurance regulators have not made clear how they will react to FASB rules on valuing illiquid assets. This uncertainty may cause insurance companies to further shrink their balance sheets at the same time that banks are doing the same thing.  Thus, although there have been some positive signs on the economy since the last FOMC meeting, I remain concerned that the financial headwinds may not have abated yet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Third Districts economy remains very weak, and the Philadelphia staffs state and coincident indicators and leading indicators suggest continuing weakness, especially in the labor markets both in our District and in the nation as a whole. Although unemployment in our District is currently slightly below the national average, there is little reason to believe that we wont catch up at some point. 
  Our business outlook survey improved a bit in April, rising to minus 24.4 from a minus 35 in March, but obviously this is still a very low reading.  The survey does offer some glimmers of hopegreen shoots, as I guess is the wisdom nowand firms expectations about activities six months from now have improved considerably.  They rose more than 20 points last month, to a plus 36.2, which is the highest reading since October 2007. In general, our business contacts and our staff forecast suggest that the contraction will continue for a while in the District.  One piece of anecdotal evidence that is worth noting, however, comes from one of our board members, who is the CEO of a leading manufacturer of residential and commercial flooring. For some time now he has been quite pessimistic, as you can imagine, and for the first time in well over a year he said something positive last weekthat he is beginning to see a bottoming in the housing market.  I take this as significant because he has been one of our most pessimistic commentators over the last year and a halfof course, understandably so. His information is consistent with other signs in the data of some stability beginning in the housing market, like the news of the upward revision of February new home 
sales that we received last Friday.  Lets hope that such welcome signs continue, but it is not a sure thing. I would also note that my contacts from the credit card industry have told me that non-auto consumer purchases for the month of April seem to be tracking at a fairly modest pace of plus 0.4 percent on a month-over-month basis.  Though not a great number, it is encouraging that the stabilization in consumption and spending seems to be continuing. So the Third Districts economy looks largely in line with the national economy.  Now, I have never been one to go easily along with the crowd, and in that regard I continue to be somewhat more optimistic than President Rosengren about economic growth, particularly in the second half of this year and in the next year, and even more so than the Greenbook.  However, 
   based on incoming data, I did revise down my GDP forecast for 2009 from the January forecast and revised upward the unemployment forecast. The revision reflects the fact that the contraction in the first quarter of this year seems to have been much steeper than I had anticipated in early January. I expect positive but modest growth in the second half, making the fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter change in real GDP modestly negative. I have not changed my growth forecast for 2010 or 2011.  I expect the economy to gain traction in 2010, picking up to about 3 percent in 2010 and settling into something closer to 
about 2.7 percent for the long-run trend in 2011. I see less of a growth rebound than many forecasts because I view the financial market shock with which we have been hit acting much like a negative and somewhat persistent productivity shock to the financial intermediation sector.  One implication of that view is that the equilibrium real output has fallen, and thus the output gaps as usually measured would be overstated.  The very weak labor market data during the first quarter have led me to revise up my path for the unemployment rate almost 1 percentage point throughout my forecast period. Obviously there are risks to this forecast, and I share President Rosengrens concern about the fragility of the financial markets and the potential for the stress-test announcement to have unfavorable reactions. My downwardly revised projections are roughly balanced, but with perhaps more than the usual amount of uncertainty.  Now I realize that my forecast is more optimistic than many, but I dont think we should discount the economic dynamics suggested by the historical data, even though I realize that the current episode might be a significant outlier 
from prior experiences.  This view is shaped, in part, by forecasts from a New Keynesian DSGE forecasting model that we are developing, whose virtue is that it runs solely off historical correlations in the data as reflected both in its estimated parameters and in the model shock 
  processes. This type of model produces a forecast with significant recovery under way by the end of the year. While I see somewhat more growth than the Greenbook, I also see less deflationary pressure than the Greenbook baseline and greater risk of higher inflation in the outyears.  There are several reasons for this less optimistic view on inflation.  First, my forecast relies more on forward-looking expectations of inflation compared with FRB/US, in which backward-looking elements are more heavily weighted in forming expectations.  Second, I put less weight on output gaps as predictors of inflation as seems to be called for by the empirical estimates of New Keynesian Phillips curves.  And third, Im not convinced that the size of the output gap is nearly as big as suggested in the Greenbook for the reasons I have already mentioned regarding the nature of the shocks we faced. This perspective also seems appropriate and is consistent with the work of Orphanides and some others indicating the pitfalls of depending too much on output gap measures, which it shows cannot be reliably measured in real time.  Indeed, Orphanides finds that the ex post revisions of output gaps are of the same order of magnitude as the output gap itself.  It is particularly hard to measure gaps at business cycle turning points. My skepticism of the empirical relevance and measurability of output gaps and my view that forward-looking expectations of economic agents dominate lead me to be highly suspicious of the Greenbooks inflation outlook. Indeed, if we look at inflation forecasts from a DSGE model, we find inflation rising over the forecast period, with headline PCE inflation rising above 3 percent in 2010 and exceeding 4 percent by 2012. Of course, I understand that the current situation and the nature of the current shocks suggest that sizable error bands are around the forecast. Still, I find that it is a useful exercise to examine these kinds of forecasts from alternative models, which are informative and helpful in thinking about the overall outlook. 
 Thus my view is that there is a growing risk of higher-than-desired inflation in the outyears of the forecast. With the funds rate at the zero bound and the concern for some near-term deflation, having inflation in the near term run a little higher than our long-term goal might be desirable.  But I dont think that we should be willing to accept inflation outcomes above our goal once the expansion is well under way.  I see that the longer-term inflation risk is tilted to the upside because I have grown more dubious of our ability to correctly time the withdrawal of the significant liquidity injections we have undertaken.  Thus, for 2009 I am forecasting inflation in excess of 1 percent1 percent and rising through the forecast period. Now, this forecast is based on my assumption that, as the financial markets and conditions improve and housing markets stabilize, the FOMC will begin to contract its balance sheet and raise the funds rate.  Appropriate monetary policy in this forecast requires that we begin raising the funds rate by the end of this year, certainly by early next year, and then continue to raise it throughout the forecast period. I have it reaching 3 percent by the fourth quarter of 2011.  Of course, this is a much steeper path than that in the Greenbook, which wouldnt be surprising since the Greenbook is zero from here on out; but it is consistent with my more optimistic forecast and my view that we 
cannot keep the funds rate at zero for the next three years and expect to achieve anything close to our inflation objective.  My forecast would show considerably more acceleration if I assumed the Greenbooks baseline forecast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I want to start out talking about the Texas manufacturing report. As you know, I dont often talk about my District.  [Laughter] Because we do produce a large share of total manufacturing goods in the United States, I want to point out that the report we released yesterday indicated pretty much what I am hearing from CEOs around the country.  
   That is, the indexes for production, capacity utilization, and volume of new orders and shipments edged upward for the second consecutive month, but our firms are reporting that job cuts exceed hires by a 10 to 1 margin, and 36 percent of the firms noted a decline in work hours.  That said, the six-month outlook turned positive for the first time since June 2008, reflecting either wishful thinking or quite probably a sense that firms have battened down the hatches, have a better sense of their vulnerabilities, and have a better sense of visibility vis--vis the budgeting that they have now ratcheted down, and I think that may account for some of this optimism. So I would not point to a silver lining.  It is what I call a pewter lining, slightly better than it was before. That is confirmed by the comments I received from the CEOs to whom I talked after I got back from Chinanot very many, but hopefully indicative.  But here are the lukewarm responses that I got in talking to some of them.  For example, the head of the National Retail Federation, who sits on my board and runs JCPenneyI love this one:  I never thought flat would look so good was his comment.  [Laughter]  Still negative, but a slightly better tone. From the CEO of Wal-Mart, seeing a little more discretionary spending, Its soft but not accelerating.  Shifting over to an entirely different sector, the CEO of Disney:  Early signs that deterioration is starting to slow. And from the CEO of Exxon looking, as I like to do, at the chemicals, lubricants, asphalt, and other possible leading indicatorsor at least indicators in terms of where the stimulus package may be hitting the road:  There werent any places where things got worse. The only place where I could find that things had gotten worse was in the rails. Shipments are down 19 percent year to date. I think that reflects mainly coal and a shift to natural gas at these cheap prices for electricity consumption.  I do note, if you look at the Edison Electric data through April 18, that weekly electricity output is still declining.  So there may be 
 some green shoots, but Id like to say that there are no sparks in terms of that kind of indicator activity. I am going to focus the remainder of my remarks on the impressions gained from my trip from April 6 to April 22 to Tokyo, Singapore, Beijing, Shanghai, and Seoul, with a focus on China. First, I would like to preface it by saying that here at home all of the Bank Presidents have their views, but Im not sure thats understood by the public.  We always say it, but abroad nobody understands that distinction. As I told you, Mr. Chairman, before I left for the trip, I stuck to the party line, remembering the old definition that a diplomat is someone who is sent abroad to lie for their country. [Laughter] I was just extremely diplomatic, faithfully toed the line, and just basically listened very carefully.  Here is what I heard. With regard to Japan, we have seen their latest projections for the fiscal year that has starteddown 3.1 percent following an equally awful year last year.  In addition to visiting at length with the Commissioner of the FSA and Governor Shirakawa, as I mentioned earlier, and the staff, I met with several CEOs. I have been going there since 79.  I would say that I had never seen them this pessimistic, I think largely because 22 percent of the economy is manufacturing and 40 percent of that is the auto industry in one form or another.  And their demographics are awful.  Industrial production is down 30 percent.  The last time that happenedI think I may have mentioned this at the last meetingwas when Godzilla destroyed Tokyo in a movie in 1954. So there is definitely a mood of extreme pessimism in Japan, and I found that very discouraging. The situation in Singapore is different. It is worse in terms of the short term.  The first-quarter performance is down 19 percent for GDP.  Ports are inactive.  But Lee Kuan Yew and his successors are planning for tapping into China. And quickly to skip over to Koreathat was the 
 one place in which I didnt feel like a dartboard or receiver of spears in that the timeliness of our foreign exchange swap really was helpful, and they are most grateful.  Their own ship seems to be floating a little better, and the economy seems to be stabilizing somewhat. I want to focus on China.  I met with the requisite what they call barbarian handlers, which includes Yi Gang and the CBRC Commissioner and the China Investment Corporation people. I also met with the nonbarbarian handlers, quite a few who are just purely internal, both in politics and in business. Here is the take-home:  They reported 6.1 percent economic growth for the first quarter. I am always amazed at the alacrity with which they report their numbers.  Kind of like Radar on MASH, they seem to know the number before the quarter is over.  [Laughter] I did find out, Mr. Chairman, where the 8 percent came from.  That is that Deng Xiaoping asked in 1980 what it would take to quadruple the economy by the year 2000, and the answer was 8 percent compounded. That is where the 8 percent comes from.  It is reported all the way upfrom the governors on up.  But as far as this 6.1 percent figure, Nathan, if you look at their importexport activity for the first quarter, exports were down 18 percent, imports were down 70 percent on an arithmetic measured basis.  And their electrical output is continuing to decline. It declined 5 percent in the first quarterour fourth quarter and through the first quarterand there just is no correlation currently, although it has been very high historically, between GDP growth and electricity consumption and output.  But currently their electricity output is significantly lagging the numbers they are reporting for economic growth. Second, with regard to the Peoples Bank of China and the CBRC, they reported that lending has focused on squeezing out excess capacity.  That seems to be their objective, and this was repeated by several of the business leaders.  They also feel that the budgeted amount they had planned for this calendar year all has been lent out in January and February, with some 
  excess floating into the securities markets, particularly the equity market.  The concern that we picked up was, for the third quarter, fourth quarter, and into next year, that basically the thrust of the fiscal package and the guidance they have given for lending, which is extending beyond the formal banking system to the trust banks and these new private banks, is basically taking place currently and might not have the kind of follow-through that they hope to see.   The bottom line is that they cannot re-gear their economy very quickly.  They are still dependent on the United Statessignificantlyand on Europe.  That is 42 percent of their export activity.  The bottom line of that is that their reserves will build more slowly.  Still, they have no choice but to focus on U.S. dollars and Treasuries in terms of their investment and a small amount of mortgage-backed securities.  They are seeking a greater role for their currency through their swap lines and through their trade invoicing in Hong Kong and some of the other major cities.  So it is unremarkable that (a) they have deep concerns about the value of their Treasury debt and (b) fewer concerns about their agency holdings.  I could have told them that we decided to purchase $5 trillion in mortgage-backed securities.  It didnt seem that it would have had much impact.  But their concerns were constant.  In every single meeting, in more than 40 meetings, they did not once fail to mention that they were concerned about our purchasing Treasuries and that they were skeptical about our ability to pull off a successful withdrawal of liquidity when the time comes. I want to conclude by reading from the April 20 issue of the China Daily. The same article appeared in the Peoples Daily in Chinese. The former Vice Premier Zeng Peiyan said, The U.S. Federal Reserves recent purchase of its Treasury bonds, which effectively prints new money, is likely to turn the budget deficit into inflation.  That will lead to the depreciation of the U.S. dollar and cause a major loss in Chinas foreign exchange reserves.  And the depreciation 
of the dollar has become an inevitable historical trend.  So it is a frisky place, and they are booming relative to everybody else.  But I basically would put that message under a subtitle of what I call Malice in Wonderland.  [Laughter] They seem to be eager to underscore this particular issue in order to protect the value of their investment.  But I didnt, frankly, find anything different from the kind of concerns I hear expressed here at home and by others who are invested in Treasuries. I would say that basically Chinas economy is not performing as well as it is reported, that they still are dependent on us, and that they confirm, Nathan, what you mentioned earlier, which is that the global economy may be picking up a bit but it still is in basically bad shape. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is a welcome relief to say for the first time in recent memory that the economic data since our last meeting have not been uniformly disappointing. The pace of contraction in aggregate spending appears to have slowed.  Consumer spending and housing show welcome signs of stabilization.  Overall, financial conditions have improved, and I have seen no indication that a dangerous deflationary dynamic has thus far taken hold. These are encouraging signs, but we should be careful not to overreact to developments that may yet prove to be will-o-the-wisps. The economic outlook remains fraught with peril.  I am particularly concerned about the labor market, where the data are appalling.  Not only has the unemployment rate risen 1.7 percentage points over the past four months, but recent readings on initial claims point to 
another dismal labor report for April.  What is worse, the unemployment rate appears to 
understate the true magnitude of the labor market deterioration.  For one thing, the incidence of permanent, as opposed to temporary, layoffs is high in comparison with past downturns.  
 Another, and probably more important, point is that there has been an unprecedented increase in involuntary part-time work.  It far exceeds what would be expected given the rise in unemployment.  My staffs analysis of CPS data confirms what we hear from our business contacts. The use of furloughs is widespread, and the surge in part-time work for economic reasons is broadly based across occupations.  The associated reduction in hours is nontrivial.  Our expectation is that the underemployment ratea broad measure that adds individuals working part-time for economic reasons to those unemployedwill top the level reached in 1982 by year-end. We expect it to climb from its current rate of about 14 percent to over 16 percent. Turning to growth, my forecast is similar to that in the Greenbook.  I expect the unemployment rate to peak at 9.6 percent late this year, a tad higher than the Greenbook, reflecting in part a somewhat more optimistic view of potential output growth compared with the Board staffs view. And, like the Greenbook, I anticipate a slow recovery in subsequent years, not the rapid V-shaped recovery we have frequently seen following deep recessions in the past. Several factors underlie my view that the recovery will be slow.  First, as I mentioned at our March meeting, I anticipate that the process of balance sheet repair that households are undergoing will result in subdued consumer spending for an extended period.  Second, monetary policy both here and abroad is severely constrained by the zero lower bound on interest rates.  Indeed, the optimal policy simulation indicates that we should lower the funds rate to negative 7 percent, if that were feasible.  Of course, it isnt, so we have turned to unconventional monetary policy tools, but these are imperfect substitutes for standard monetary policy.  According to the Bluebook simulations, even if we more than double the large-scale asset purchases we have put into motion, we are nowhere near the desirable outcome in terms of 
 unemployment and inflation, which might be within reach if the zero bound were not constraining policy. In addition, the slow start of the TALF program raises doubts about whether this tool will provide a great deal of lift to the economy.   Third, I am concerned that the banking system is not really strong enough to expand credit in the manner that is required for a rapid economic rebound.  The new capital that is slated for injection following the stress test should be helpful, but I think it will likely prove insufficient. Thanks to the Herculean efforts of staff members across the Federal Reserve System and other agencies, we now have a much clearer picture of the potential losses confronting our major banks.  My personal interpretation of the dataand I think my assessment is consistent with market views as revealed in CDS spreads and the prices of bank sharesis that there remains a nontrivial probability that the existing common shareholders of a number of the major banks will be wiped out in an adverse economic scenario.  This possibility diminishes their incentive to raise new capital to support additional lending.  The problem is that the benefits of the extra capital would accrue disproportionately to debt holders and preferred shareholders, including the U.S. government, who are more senior in the capital structure. A separate problem is that banks with government capital appear heavily focused on getting out from the restrictions and stigma associated with the TARP.  They insist that it is impossible to raise new private equity when it will sit side by side with money from the government, and this creates an incentive for them to devote their earnings to pay off TARP capital rather than to use the retained earnings to support increased lending. I have enumerated several reasons why I project a sluggish recovery.  Additionally, I remain concerned about downside risks.  I am particularly concerned that another shoe may drop.  Confidence in global financial markets is extremely fragile, and more bad news could trigger 
  another panic and run on the financial system.  Unfortunately, the road ahead is littered with headlines of defaults, bankruptcies, and rising unemployment.  While a big chunk of the losses associated with residential mortgages may have been realized already, we are only at the beginning of that process for consumer and commercial real estate loans, and the magnitude of the likely losses has risen dramatically as the economy has deteriorated.  European banks face a similar situation with mounting losses and a sizable exposure to Eastern Europe.  If another shoe drops, risk premiums are likely to spike again, and a further pullback in lending and spending 
seems likely.  My staff has been examining the effects of tighter lending standards and measures of uncertainty on consumer spending. They find that these two factors explain a sizable share of the weakness in consumption growth in the second half of last year.  In our baseline forecast, 
these negative influences are expected to dissipate over the next year, contributing to a revival of consumer spending.  But a real risk is that further bad news could reverse this process.  The false dawn scenario in the Greenbook illustrates one potential outcome. Let me, finally, comment on inflation.  I have been struck by the resilience in wages and core inflation despite sharply declining commodity prices and a dramatic increase in slack in the labor and goods markets.  Measures of long-run inflation expectations have also been reasonably stable, and that is very reassuring. Looking forward, I expect inflation expectations to remain well anchored. I expect core inflation to dip down to 1 percent this year and 1 percent next year, about  percentage point above the Greenbook forecast and similar to the well-anchored 
expectations scenario reported in the Greenbook.  Of course, given the very somber outlook for the global economy and the downside risks to this forecast, there is considerable chance of a more sizable fall in inflation, and such a scenario represents another downside risk to the outlook for economic activity as well. 
In summary, despite the recent bits of good news, the economy remains in very bad shape. I expect at best a gradual recovery starting late this year, with core inflation remaining below my preferred 2 percent rate for the next few years, and I see substantial downside risk to that forecast for both economic activity and inflation. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the staff assessment thatto use their wordshints of stabilization in the incoming data and some favorable financial developments since the time of the March meeting have occurred.  But I also agree with their words that the evidence on this issue is by no means decisive.  I see the situation as quite ambiguous. I note a positive turn in business sentiment in my District.  I think it is best described as a waning of extreme pessimism rather than growing optimism.  Like President Fishers CEO, one of my directors said that flat is the new up.  [Laughter] My retail contacts advise that the weak retail spending numbers of March are more characteristic of what to expect in the second quarter than the strengths seen in January and February.  The nations largest home improvement chain announced that March sales are down sharply year over year, and they are further marking down 
their modest sales projections for the balance of 2009. Home sales have shown greater stabilityaround low levels, of coursein most parts of the Sixth District and are up year over year in Florida.  By most accounts, new home inventories continue to creep lower.  But there is still considerable downward pressure on prices, and builders do not anticipate any sustained increase in construction activity anytime soon.  A large backlog of foreclosures and other home inventory is likely to enter the pipeline soon.  A comment on condominiums, which represent a significant portion of my Districts real estate market:  They are under increasing pressure. That pressure has been exacerbated by the fragile 
 financial condition of homeowner associations, further distancing some otherwise creditworthy buyers from access to adequate credit.  In addition, serious concerns continue to be expressed about commercial real estate. One contact said that there is almost no financing available.  Even after accounting for weakening fundamentals, this source indicated that there is a serious lack of liquidity and predicted that commercial real estate will put major stress on financial institutions.  On balance, the attitude that the economy would bump along the bottom for some time is common among my business contacts and continues to be a factor affecting my outlook. The forecast I submitted is similar in some respects to President Yellens.  It is similar to the Greenbook over the balance of the year. Although I, too, see a recovery under way toward the end of the year, I expect that the expansion will be considerably slower than in the Greenbook. In my view, a slow restoration of credit market function, constrained consumer 
activity, and lingering economic uncertainty that restrains investment spending are likely to retard the recovery process. The general perception of improving financial and credit markets presented in the Greenbook was supported by my financial market contacts.  Like the Greenbook, I am hearing positive reports of improved access to capital markets for investment-grade nonfinancial corporations, and this has extended down to triple-B firms as well as some improvement in the high-yield and convertible bond markets.  But my contacts continue to describe financial markets as quite fragile. As President Rosengren commented on extensively, the bank stress tests are, unsurprisingly, seen as a critical event, and opinions on the subject were varied.  One contact predicted that the results are likely to be quite contentious and disruptive. In contrast, another argued that tough and aggressive tests would be a positive sign that problems are being confronted. Concern was also expressed in some of these conversations about the state of the 
insurance sector. The insurance sector is more than triple the size of the investment banking sector, which in many respects was the source of some of our problems, and the view was expressed that the sector could deteriorate further if capital restrictions begin to bite. As to the restoration of the financial markets, we did a poll of some of our directors regarding the TALF, which they said was generating very little interest.  They cited a lack of demand from borrowers, insufficient detail about the program, uncertainty over future business conditions, and some community banks saying that the minimum of $10 million was too steep to participate. Regarding the balance of risks, my assessment of the risk to economic growth remains weighted to the downside. However, I have revised my assessment of the risk to inflation to being broadly balanced. Consistent with the ambiguous state of the outlook at this juncture, I remain concerned about and attentive to deflation risk while recognizing that our various actions to grow the balance sheet may stoke inflation expectations and bear upside inflation risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy, like the national economy, is mired in recession.  I think it is somewhat less severe than some other areas, but it is still a very sharp recession.  One winner in the District, and in the nation, is Wal-Mart, which has benefited from trade-down by consumers during the recession.  This has also mitigated some problems in an otherwise overbuilt northwest Arkansas.  Some contacts 
not all, not even mostsee very tentative signs of a bottoming out.  But at least one contact who has been very pessimisticthis is like President Plossers contactfelt that sales volume and revenue numbers had flattened out and that, therefore, the firm had found the bottom.  More 
  important, this particular CEO was actually acting on that idea going forward and developing business strategies based on the idea that they were at the bottom.  That is in the transportation industry. Nationally, this is one of the worst recessions in the postwar era, according to a number of metrics.  My judgment is that, at this point, we will just need to have more data before we can see what is going to happen here. I am not particularly convinced that we have seen signs of bottoming out.  Turning points are notoriously hard to predict.  You could easily turn down again, given the situation that we are in. As President Yellen has stressed, we are susceptible to further shocks from unknown quarters.  In my view, we have lots of issues that are really not resolved at this point, especially the financial market turmoil but also issues in the auto sector and the prospects for global recovery. Measures of financial market stress are showing only modest improvement, and that is relative to very high peaks, so I would not find this very convincing.  If we were seeing these kinds of numbers before the crisis began, wed be saying that these are horrible numbers.  So it is only modest improvement relative to a very bad situation.  Time has not been a healer for financial markets.  If you would have told me at the beginning, in August 2007, that these would still be lingering this long, I would have been very surprised.  I would have expected them to heal. The FRB/US model is probably not a good guide for policymaking in this environment.  I base this on the brilliant figure provided in the memo by Robert Tetlow and Peter Tulip.  It is their figure 1, which shows 90 percent confidence intervals for key forecast variables as of June 2007. No doubt, many of you read it.  Actual events have far outstripped these measures of uncertainty, so we are way outside the confidence bands that were put around forecasts at that 
  time except for inflation, and my interpretation of that is that we are quasi-inflation targeting and inflation stays close to the target. The memo does a great job of summarizing issues about thinking about uncertainty in our models.  We often talk about uncertainty around the table, but it is hard to internalize the extent to which it is true and what the magnitudes really are. One way to think about how much uncertainty we face is to consider not just what has happened in the United States in the last 20 years or even the last 4 years but to consider what happens sometimes in foreign economies.  You have lots of experiences internationallymany different countries, many different times and places, and many different policies that have been pursued, some of them with disastrous effects.  Of course, we always say, Well, those are foreign countries. That didnt happen here.  But getting a range of experience and a range of the kinds of things that can happen in what is a very explosive situation that is marked by panics, runs, and huge expectational effects might give you a better idea of the kinds of outcomes that might materialize going forward and how much uncertainty is really out there, as opposed to what has happened just in the United States over a relatively benign period until recently. We know that macro expectations are critical for the behavior of the economy.  This is probably not the FRB/US models strong suit.  The model is great at tracking the evolution of the U.S. economy in ordinary, relatively tranquil circumstances.  It is not designed to capture the types of dramatic global signaling effects that we have witnessed during the last nine months.  So I would downplay the predictions from the model at this juncture, and I think implicitly we all say that. I think that is also the recommendation of the staffif you work with the model every day, you understand what the limitations are, where the assumptions are, and what other kinds of effects are not part of the design of the model. 
  I just want to mention the memo by Eileen Mauskopf and Jae Sim, which I thought was also quite good. They also stressed the uncertainty about their estimates, which is certainly dramatic.  But at the same time, this memo begins to lay out the ideas about an optimal plan for the Committee and for monetary policy going forward.  Whatever policies we decide on, we do need a reason that we think a particular path is the optimal one. As I have said before, I would like to get away from the one-time announcements that tend to surprise the market.  When the market is surprised by what we do, that is not necessarily a very good sign.  That is a sign that they are not understanding what we are up to, and that they are surprised at the time that the announcement is made.  That is not usually a signal that the policy is close to optimal.  Current policy in the United States is trading heavily on U.S. credibility.  If we were a small developing country pursuing our current policies, I do not think we could get away with it.  Expectations of inflation would rise rapidly, in my opinion.  So this shows how much credibility and 
expectations will influence U.S. outcomes going forward.  We are leaning very hard on this aspect, and the rest of the world is counting on our credibility. Our models are not good at dealing with these issues.  The model, as I said before, is designed to track in tranquil times.  If we push too hard, we may again get surprised by outcomes that are not potential outcomes that the model can describe.  One possibility would be a sharp rise in longer-term Treasury yields, such as that which the Chinese officials described to President Fisher. I am concerned at this juncture about the potential for large mistakes.  We have an output gap, which is yawning by traditional measures.  However, like President Plosser, I would emphasize the New Keynesian concept of an output gap, which is probably far smaller.  The New Keynesian model is the leading theory on the table today in academia.  In it, the economy 
  has to react to a very large and very real shock.  The gap is then not the difference between what happens on average and actual output but the difference between a flexible price concept of output and the actual output that you get on sticky prices.  That gap is likely to be much smaller than what is described in our FRB/US model, and this has the potential, at this juncture, to be a huge policy error. If you consider the description by Athanasios Orphanides, the rise of inflation during the 1970s was all based on poor estimation of output gaps and maybe poor concepts of output gaps.  I think it is a clear and very pronounced risk in the current circumstances.  If you think that the economy had to react to this real shock and then the flexible price level of output is a little different from the sticky price level of output, thats your output gap.  Otherwise, you think that the output gap is way up here and so it is very different.  A key medium-term risk for the Committee is that we think about that concept in the right way. I will finish up with a few comments on the balance sheet.  I have advocated splitting the balance sheet into two components, and much of the analysis is doing that in various ways.  There is a lot more discussion in terms of seeing certain programs as transitory, lender-of-lastresort programs, so-called liquidity programs, as opposed to the persistent outright purchase programs of MBS, Treasuries, and agency debt.  One idea I would have going forward for the lender-of-last-resort programs, one thing the Committee and the Board could consider, is trying 
to price those programs so that they are all backstops.  This means that especially the TAF, the CPFF, and the swaps would all continue to exist, but we would arrange the pricing to make them just outside what would be available through market channels.  I am not sure exactly how this could be done, but I think it could be done. My sense is that we are closer to that right now than we have been in the last nine months.  If we could do that, you could take the volumes in those 
 programs down to zero, but the programs would remain in place with the backstop pricing in case financial market turmoil again intensifies.  This would provide the benefits of these programs without clouding up the balance sheet with large volume, which might be helpful for monetary policy going forward. It is close to what a lot of people have talked about herethat the programs would fade away. But we could make them fade away by doing the pricing in just the right way, so that they would be backstops, but they would not have much volume in them.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Much as President Yellen said, I think the best news today seems to be that, for once, the forecast has not deteriorated between FOMC meetings.  In fact, looking at, in the Greenbook, the evolution of the staff forecast, this is about the only noticeable time that the forecast has improved in the past year.  So thanks very much, Dave and your staff, for that. [Laughter] President Bullard just made a number of very interesting and stimulating comments, and I want to take just a slight exception. I thought that the rap on FRB/US was a bit too tough on the forecast. As I understand it, it is really more the Greenbook.  I agree with you that you have to know what you are trying to use the model forthe question that is being asked.  But I am hard-pressed to think of any model that would predict well during this period.  I think that these models are helpful for verifying our intuition in a disciplined fashion in response to a number of these issues. You pointed out that the MauskopfSim paper was useful, and that used FRB/US as well. So I just wanted to mention that. We have nudged up our forecast a bit, and there is not much distance between our projections and the Greenbook. The broad contours of that outlook seem consistent with what I 
 am hearing from my directors and other business contacts.  They say that the pace of deterioration is slowing and report that the most dire scenarios now seem less likely.  Some of them had been close to making some major structural cutbacks but are now postponing those plans in the hope that they can be avoided completely. A couple of factors seem to underlie the modest improvement in the outlook of business people. One is that credit conditions are somewhat better.  This is evident in the spreads and other data that we looked at earlierthe Greenbooks financial factors indexesand in the rebound in equity markets.  Another factor is that, after all the cutting, the economys natural cyclical adjustment process is finally becoming evident.  Inventories have been slashed, and although many firms say that they have more cutting to do, they are at least to the point where they can imagine having stocks under control.  After that, they will need to increase production to keep up with demand.  In addition, in sectors, such as housing, that have had the most excess capacity, falling prices may be finally helping to stabilize demand.   That said, the improvement in tone is a relative one.  As President Bullard said, my conversations with business people are still dominated by reports of further declines in activity and extremely difficult business environments.  Whereas previously they talked as if the bottom was unimaginably far in the future, now they can see faint signs of its emergence.  I suppose in the Washington area this goes as green shoots.  Perhaps in Minneapolis it is referred to as the spring thaw. In Chicago, the Cubs are playing baseball, and it wont be long before they are thinking about next year. [Laughter]  Anyway, nobody seems to think the bottom is here yet.  While businesses feel that the risk may be lower, many still feel as though they are in a battle for survival, and they are acting accordingly.  In our District, with autos and steel and heavily weighted toward manufacturing, that seems to be the case. 
This all seems consistent with our forecast, which, like the Greenbook, projects further declines in output this spring before fiscal stimulus and the change in inventory dynamics lead to positive growth in the second half of the year.  Absent another round of contracting credit conditions, this is a reasonable expectation.  I hope these forecasts rely on modest credit market improvements and are not premised on outright rebounds in credit conditions.  That seems less likely, especially given the commentary from Dave Stockton in the question and answer period. I am not especially optimistic that the stress-test results and whatever public capital injections they necessitate will boost appreciably the supply of bank lending.  After all, additional injections are insurance against higher possible losses.  I worry that bankers will spend more time trying to right-size their balance sheet in order to repay their TARP money, and this has been mentioned by others as well.  On the TALF, we are off to a slow start.  There are fears of further government-imposed restrictions.  Clearly, this is a useful backstop for some impaired ABS markets.  It seems less likely to be a stimulus for robust expansion of aggregate demand, but less of a headwind is a plus at this point. Our inflation forecast has not changed much.  We have revised up 2009 a bit to reflect the incoming data, but we continue to see core PCE inflation coming in at about 1 percent in 2010 and 2011. The risks to the inflation outlook have not changed and continue to be significant in both directions, it seems.  The large and persistent resource gaps justify some worry about more-marked disinflation, but it is not possible to speak in public and avoid hearing that inflation and inflation expectations are about to increase greatly because of the explosion of our balance sheet and concerns about monetizing the rising government debt.  Perceptions of previous episodes, in which policy reversed course tentatively, slowly, and even late, haunt these critics; and issues like the Orphanides gap are also a possible reason for that concern.  Everyone has carefully 
 discussed the need for a prudent exit strategy to avoid these risks, and I appreciate all the commentary about more discussion at our June meeting to look at our balance sheet and possible exit strategies.  So there is little more that we can do on this score at the moment, but maintaining our current policy trajectory might help a bit, given the improved situation today.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We can add to the statement, Wait until next year. [Laughter]  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, I heard from an encouraging number of contacts that business conditions were showing some initial signs of stabilizing at very low levels. Relatively large companies with deep pockets and access to credit seem prepared to wait out the recession, although many have to make some painful adjustments.  Others, especially small businesses, worry openly about running out of cash and time.  Some employers are still considering reductions in staffing, and it is rare to find companies engaged in any net hiring. Even hospitals, which are traditionally very stable employers, have been reducing staff where possible in response to declines in demand.  Public-sector and nonprofit employment continues to be under pressure as well.  Although most of the employment declines we are observing result from cyclical forces, I think that more than the usual share of employment losses also stem from structural factors.  After reviewing the declining pattern of job openings reported in the JOLTS data, as well as the relatively low levels of temporary layoffs that President Yellen commented on, my staff concludes that labor market reallocations are likely to be quite large and prolonged during this business cycle. Regarding inflation, I appreciate the concern about a continuing deceleration in our price measures.  However, I am struck by the number of people I speak with who worry that our policy 
      actions will cause inflation to accelerate in the future.  In fact, the people who worry about accelerating inflation far outnumber those who express concerns about future deflation.  So I am not overly concerned at this point about deteriorating inflation expectations. My view is that, with clear communication about our inflation objectives, our large-scale asset purchase will damp the decline of long-term inflation expectations, something that the ReifschneiderRoberts memo tells us is not captured in FRB/US.  In my projection, core PCE inflation remains in the range of 1 percent to 1 percent through 2011, whereas in the Greenbook baseline, inflation falls below 1 percent. The anecdotal information that we collected, along with the data that we received, hasnt led me to make any material changes to my outlook for employment and output since our March meeting.  My current output projection has some differences in timing of the recovery compared with the Greenbook baseline; however, I dont consider them to be material.  My forecast for the unemployment rate does deviate more substantially from the Greenbook as a result of my interpretation of the persistent weakness that we are seeing in labor markets.  My baseline projection has more labor reallocation taking place than the Greenbook does, and that drives my forecast for unemployment to peak at a bit over 10 percent before it begins to decline.  The additional labor reallocation embedded in my outlook is another factor that puts my core inflation forecast on a higher path than that in the Greenbook.  That is, I see a somewhat smaller output gap than the Greenbook does because I see a somewhat lower level of potential output in my projection coming from the labor market reallocations that I commented on. It goes without saying that the level of uncertainty around my projection is unusually great, and there are many risk factors that could render it inaccurate.  One of the risks that looms large in my mindand it has already been mentioned by several others around the table today 
 is that announcing the results of the stress test could add to the fragility of the banking system, and it could result in a further pullback in bank lending, as others have commented.  At least that was the gut reaction I got from the bankers that I talked to as I was presenting the preliminary results of the test.  I hope that we will fully consider these concerns as we decide what information to release publicly.  Many of us are on record as saying that, in order to restore confidence in the banking system, we have to see private capital go back into that system.  I am concerned that announcing that a majority of the 19 bank holding companies need additional capital and that the additional capital can come from the government is going to scare private investors away.  So, on balance, I regard the risk to my outlook for both output and inflation to be weighted to the downside, especially taking into consideration some of the announcement effect of our stress test.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A bit of a shift in our District information is discernible over the last month or two.  First, the quantitative information.  Our Fifth District manufacturing survey, which you will recall is released a few days later than the New York and Philadelphia indexes, but covers more manufacturing activity than both of those indexes combined  [Laughter] MR. FISHER. But not as much as my District. 
MR. LACKER. I believe more than the Dallas District as well.  The survey has moved sharply back to neutral over the last two months from the exceptionally negative readings we were seeing earlier, and the shipments and orders components have increased from around minus 50 in February to around zero now.  Interestingly, the six-months-ahead expectation measures for shipments and orders are solidly in positive territory, but the index for capital 
 expenditures remains negative, suggesting that excess capacity will be restraining business investment for a while.  So far we have not seen similar moves in our service sector survey.  Overall our surveys suggest a bottoming out in goods production but continued decline in services. Qualitative information from our directors and other contacts also suggests a shift in tone from uniformly dismal to mixed.  Some directors see signs of life for building lot transactions in some marketsNorth Carolina and central Maryland were mentioned.  There are scattered reports of an increase in residential real estate traffic, although contacts are not yet saying that this has translated into increased sales.  Even though this may just be the seasonal pickup youd normally expect, people seem to be treating a normal seasonal pickup in real estate traffic as positive news, given the experience of the past few years. The Fifth District hospitality sector seems to have been hurt by a fear of adverse publicity. One director whose firm stages trade shows says that fun appears to be the new F word. [Laughter] A contact who runs a resort on the South Carolina coast reports corporations canceling bookings for which they have already paid in full.  People apparently dont want to risk the bad publicity of showing up, which is puzzling because critics presumably object to the expenditure not the utility derived.  [Laughter]  In West Virginia, the coal industry is described as somewhat shell-shocked because of falling coal prices, although drilling rigs from western states have been moving east to take advantage of increased drilling activity in the Marcellus shale formation. At the national level, there have been some signals consistent with a business cycle trough sometime in the middle of the year, I think.  I put the tentative signs of stabilization in the housing sector chief among these since the return of some confidence on that front seems 
  important for restoring a broader willingness by households to resume discretionary spending.  Of course, we have been fooled by hints of housing market bottoms before.  So it is not hard for me to curb my enthusiasm.  Still, the recent consumer spending numbers also suggest that a broader household resilience may be emerging.  Consumers seem to have been cutting back in response to the general erosion in their confidence about future income and wealth; and the fact that consumer spending was relatively stable in the first quarter, despite ending on a down note, might reflect some households looking through the recession toward a return to sustained 
growth. Similarly, I think the weakness in business spending has been driven mainly by a dearth of foreseeable profit opportunities as opposed to being held back by credit constraints.  The tentative signs of stabilization on the durable goods front are welcome news, but I think it will take some evidence of a sustained improvement in consumer spending and, thus, revenue growth to bring business spending back to the table in a major way. Regarding inflation, the stability of long-term expectations has been notable and stands in contrast to the Greenbooks forecasted expectations that inflation will drift steadily downward over the next few years. Personally, my outlook for inflation expectations is centered near 2 percent.  I think the inherent difficulties in projecting inflation expectations are significant, but theres also at least as much of a chance that they will increase significantly during the recovery rather than decrease. I continue to worry about how we are going to know whether we are doing enough, too little, or too much and how we are going to know when to begin unwinding the 
expansion of our balance sheet. It seems like a daunting problem for us.  My sense is that credit spreads are going to be too ambiguous to act on, and I am leery of taking too much comfort from Japans experience. So I believe we could use a better understanding of the effect of our large reserve balances on the banking system. 
   Finally, Mr. Chairman, down in North Carolina the bankers are distributing these lapel pins. Theyre little round green things and they say EGBAR. Now I am not going to be able to do justice to a North Carolina drawl, but it comes out something like this:  Everythings going to be all right. [Laughter]  I dont know whether they believe it or whether they just want their customers to believe it.  But in any event, they dont say when its going to be all right, so Im not sure that we should put much faith in this either.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any charge for the pins? MR. LACKER. I got this one for free, and that means it is worth less than $20.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Your drawl will be reflected in the transcript. [Laughter] President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Im in substantial agreement with the Greenbook forecast, for the next four or five quarters anyway.  As several people have noted, certainly there is a lot of uncertainty around, but it seems to me that there is a reasonable chance that recovery will get under way around midyearJune, July, or thereabouts.  I think it is worth bearing in mind that, if that happens, we probably wont discern it for at least several months thereafterAugust, September, or Octoberpartially because of data flows and partially because, as I expect, initially the recovery will be quite modest, which means that the incoming data are going to be mixed at best and it will be possible to read some of it positively and some of it negatively. I think that this level of uncertainty is simply going to be part of what were going to experience. I do agree, as I said earlier, that the recovery will initially be quite modest.  President Yellen and others have done a good job of elucidating the reasons for that.  Nevertheless, I didnt 
really revise my forecast from January, so I have almost all the same numbers.  If I were going to revise the forecast, Id probably revise it up rather than down at this pointnot by a lot and not trying to get to the typical recovery alternative in the Greenbook, which would be extraordinary if the economy produced something like that.  But it does seem to me that the variety of data that have come in have been better than anticipated, including improvement in credit market conditions. None of that may turn out to be durable, but on the other hand, I think we have been anticipating that some of this was going to improve and some healing would occur over time. I guess I dont expect the stress test to lead to an increase in bank lending.  I thought the stress test was trying to address uncertainty about the conditions of banks, and I think its going to come down to whether the report is credible with regard to two large and very sick institutions. But I dont think the rest of it is going to matter very much.  It is really whether the numbers associated with those institutions strike people in the financial markets as sensible, 
appropriate, and so forth. If they do, I think the stress test will probably have helped.  If not, I think were going to have potential chaosI guess thats the way I would put it. As far as inflation goes, I expect inflation to be low, but certainly the second-most-asked question I get when Im out talking to people is, Arent we going to see a burst of inflation with the expansion in your balance sheet and with the stance of fiscal policy?  So it seems to me that discussing exit strategies, sterilization, and so forth in June is going to be important, and communicating with the public about this is going to be important, recognizing that we might have a bit of a timing issue on our hands.  I guess the way that I would put it is that we first want to make sure the fire is out.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
 MR. HOENIG. Let me start with the District, and Ill be brief.  I have talked to several dozen people in the region, and I have not had a single one tell me that they think things are improving.  But what I do hear is that things are not getting any worse except for a couple of areas. One of those areas is natural gas production, which if those rigs are moving your way, Id look at them pretty carefully before I put them in production, given the price of natural gas right now. The other is commercial real estate. There is a lot of angst about commercial real estate in the region. It is under pressure. Projects are on hold and have been stopped.  A lot of banks are holding this stuff, and a lot of them have pretty heavy concentrations of it, which gives me pause.  On the other hand, when they say things are not getting worse, there are some indications of manufacturing beginning to stabilize, some retail sales beginning to stabilize, and even some of the housing, even though it is down from a year ago, in the last couple of months has shown some stability as well in the region. About the national outlookI think that, as we go through the rest of this year and into next year, we will see things improve.  There are a couple of positive forces and then one thing that I consider a real negative.  The two positives are that, as we see inventories and values adjust, people then will begin to move forward.  Complementing that is the fact that the stimulus package is starting to flow.  Were seeing a lot of highway projects really getting going, especially in our region.  The one thing that I find interesting is the value of subsidies because, as the ethanol industry is collapsing, we are now in the wind tunnelseeing enormous amounts of investment on wind energy being placed there.  There is no way to get it out yet, but they are building these towers by the thousands, and that is adding a lot of activity in the rural areas, particularly of our region. 
   The negative is the credit and banking conditions.  There is a fair amount of capital in these banks, but when you see their asset issues and their uncertainty around those assets, they are conserving that capital and they are holding back on lending.  Another part of this is, as we have introduced each new planwhether it was the PPIP or whatevermoney has gone to the sidelines to see how that is going to evolve.  That has made things slower than they might have otherwise been, and I think we need to be aware of that. As you boil all of this down, I think the stimulus will be a big plus as we move through this year and into next.  As we stabilize, theres a real upside, but the credit market banking level is a big risk going forward. I dont think weve begun at all to address the commercial real estate problems that are just wreaking havoc.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the economy is going to do somewhat better over the next few months and, I hope, quarters.  A big swing in the rate of inventory liquidation is certainly going to help, and we have seen in the past that it can be very, very powerful quarter to quarter. A good example is the fourth quarter of 2001 to the first quarter of 2002which was probably the worst forecast I ever made in my lifebut Im not going to be very impressed by that for several reasons. First, we still do not have the banking system on a sound footing, and thats pretty damning, frankly, 20 months into this crisis.  If we can do a good job with the supervisory capital assessment program and get more capital into the banking system, then we have a fighting 
chance. In this regard, I think it is important for us all to be on message about this.  Next week is going to be really, really important.  The announcement will generate lots of criticism:  The stress test is not severe enough, the estimated losses are too low, and so on.  I believe that we 
should emphasize three points.  First, what is the purpose of the exercise?  To get more capital into the banking system and thereby to make the adverse outcome less likely.  It is important not to get lost in the fine print.  Second, the adverse scenario that was assumed is still considerably worse than the base forecast; and in the adverse scenario, banks would still be well capitalized.  We need to emphasize that.  Third, in assessing the loss figures, we need to make it clear that the losses that matter for commercial banks are credit losses, not liquidation losses.  Because banks 
have deposits, they can hold their assets to maturity.  This means that the liquidation value is mostly irrelevant. This is particularly important in the current environment, of course, because 
the illiquidity discount is unusually high.  This makes the value of the assets to those, such as banks, that are leveraged and have deposits that can fund and hold those assets much greater than the value of the assets to those, such as hedge funds, that have difficulties in this environment obtaining leverage. The second thing that I would stress about the economic outlook is that a lot of pain is still ahead, and Ill echo some of President Hoenigs comments.  Commercial mortgages and highly leveraged loans appear particularly vulnerable.  Commercial mortgages are suffering from a double whammya higher capitalization rate on mortgages and lower income.  This is pushing 
down commercial real estate values sharply.  The John Hancock Tower sold for half the price at which it was purchased in 2005, and thats considered a prime property rather than a not very attractive property. I dont see this ending very quickly.  On the corporate side, highly leveraged businesses are going to have trouble refinancing for the same reason.  The rise in the risk-adjusted return demanded by investors will significantly drive down the value of the underlying enterprises.  For many private equity deals, covenant-lite loans and PIK toggles will delay the 
 day of reckoning, but that just means that the resulting hole that must be filled will be bigger as a consequence. The third thing Id say on the economy is that the big news is the large adjustment that households are going to have to make in terms of deleveraging and the offsetting shift that were going to have to see in foreign economies toward stimulating domestic demand and away from exports. Thats going to take quite a bit of time, and to my mind that process is just starting.  This is one more reason that I think the risks to the economic outlook, even expecting that GDP growth may resume by the second half of this year, are still very much to the downside. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like the others, Im encouraged by some of the signs of stability in household spending and consumption and of housing demand leveling out in 
the first quarter, albeit at very low levels.  I think it is an especially hopeful sign that the stability occurred when jobs and production were declining very rapidly, and at least for the first two months of the quarter, the financial markets were getting worse, not better.  Also encouraging, as others have pointed out, is the stability and slight improvement in financial conditions over the last month or so.  I think perceptions that the downside risks have abated are in the financial markets.  This is a necessary condition for economic recovery and is indicative that confidence has stabilized and may be beginning to increase.  You see a bit of this in household consumer confidence in the past month or two. Production is below even the weak level of demand; so as long as demand doesnt fall off further, conditions are in place for working through the inventory cycles in goods and houses with a gradual rise in production as the negative inventory dynamics of the past few quarters ebb 
and reverse. And there are good reasons to think that final demand will continue to stabilize. 
  Consumption behavior in the first quarter does suggest perhaps a more gradual upward drift in the saving rate after a very sharp adjustment in the level of consumption in the second half of last year due to declining wealth, greater uncertainty, and very, very poor job prospectsso maybe a slower increase in the saving rate from here on out. Housing demand is at frictional levels.  Of course, I thought that several quarters ago, but maybe it really is at frictional levels now and is perhaps being bolstered by low prices and interest rates. I take some encouragement from the firming in commodity prices, which I think suggests that global weakness is beginning to abate somewhat.  Certainly the conversations I had with G-20 emerging-market central bankers over the last weekend were that, like some of the anecdotes were hearing around the table, they see less weakness and some signs of improvement and the commodity markets were an important sign of that.  As consumption demand stabilizes, the decline in capital investment should abate as the capital stock comes in line with the lower level of sales.  So I agree with the basic shape of the staff forecast for the next few quarters:  a slower decline and then stability. Still, I do think there are downside risks for the near term, especially from an accident in the financial sector. Signs of improvement are tentative.  Financial markets are fragile.  Lots of 
people have addressed the stress-test risk, and I think its very, very large both for an accident in the near term, over the next week or two, and for damping.  If confidence isnt restored through the injection of capital and banks get even more cautious about not wanting to convert the convertible preferred into government common, or if they have to take that convertible preferred, theyre going to damp their lending.  So I think there are near-term and long-term risks here.  I agree with what the Vice Chairman said:  The idea here was to build confidence.  If we handle it right, I think it is possible; but the risks are huge. 
  Even though I see downside risks, I think theyre smaller than I thought they were a meeting or two ago.  The end of the recession is still a forecast, but at least we have some tentative evidence that the elements are falling into place.  I also agree with the staff expectation that the subsequent recovery will be gradual, more gradual than in past recessions, with a large output gap persisting for some time.  My reasons are the same that many others have cited.  Financial repair will be slow.  As President Bullard pointed out, borrowing rates, terms, and conditions for many private borrowers are still very tight, and we would have considered them very tight at any other time even if they have improved some.  A return to more-normal financial markets and easier financial conditions will take time.  The financial system is adjusting to reduced leverage and better liquidity protection, and that will be good in the long run.  But that adjustment is going to take time, and it implies tight credit for a while.  More intermediation is going to have to flow through banks, and banks will need to rebuild capital.  Though the government capital might be helpful in that regard, its not clear that it will be.  And lenders are still worried about the economic outlook and credit losses, and I think that concern is likely to dissipate slowly. As others have pointed out, household balance sheets also need repair.  Saving rates will be high relative to recent history and could trend higher as households rebuild wealth.  Confidence is likely to recover slowly after recent events.  Animal-spirit-damped expectations will remain a restraint on spending.  Businesses and households, given the shocks that they have been through, are likely to remain cautious. I think the global character of the downturn also suggests that the upturn is going to be restrained.  There are policy constraints on fiscal policy in lots of places because of concerns about long-term fiscal sustainability, and of course, monetary policy almost everywhere 
 including the United States is constrained by the zero lower bound.  No country is really going to pull the others out of the recession, and I am concerned over the intermediate to the longer run about what is going to substitute for consumption.  The U.S. household demand for houses and for goods and services has really been an engine of growth for the global economy, and its not obvious to me where the substitute for that is going to come from. So I do think a slow, gradual recovery is the most likely outcome.  I had something like the staffs forecasta little faster at the end, but still quite slow. The inflation implications of this are that inflation should continue to drift down.  I think the gap is high and will be high for some time.  That will put downward pressure on inflation, although inflation expectations are anchored and the downward drift should be limited.  I agree with President Plosser and others that you cant really measure the output gap.  Its a concept, not a thing you can ever measure, and its risky to put a lot of weight on it.  But I do think the gap is large enough right now, and the information we have from which we can infer whats going on suggests that its still large.  If you look at 12-month inflation ratesPCE, CPIthey are all drifting down, which is what you would kind of expect if you had an output gap, although the last three months were higher than we anticipated, so maybe you need to keep an eye on that.  We dont have much in the way of compensation data.  The last compensation data we had were for the fourth quarter. One measurethe productivity and cost measurewas kind of flat, had been flat through the year, and didnt show any trend; but the ECI, which is a measure on which weve put more emphasis in previous analyses, did show a distinct deceleration through the fourth quarter, which would suggest to me that there was an output gap.  Average hourly earnings, which is a very flawed measure of labor costs, that we have through March, showed a very, very definite deceleration. So I think the price and wage data, imperfect as they are, 
  suggest that there is a considerable output gap putting downward pressure on increases in those things. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  After the despair at our last meeting, we may have expected to find ourselves with locusts, floods, and plagues.  [Laughter] So I suspect the swine flu pandemic and the leaked stress-test results do seem like veritable green shoots in comparison.  [Laughter] May that be the ninth and last reference to green shoots today, unless my colleagues choose to reference that as well. I think, as the Greenbook and Dave suggested, that the most significant change since the last time we met is in the tone, tenor, and level of financial markets.  But I hesitate to take too much definitive comfort from these improvements and recognize, of course, that the financial markets and the real economy are relating to one another.  But, again, a lot seems to be hinging on continued improvements in these markets.  So let me talk first about financial market developments; second, briefly about financial firms and stress tests; third, about the economy; and, fourth, briefly about inflation. First, on the financial market side, we have seen since the lows on March 9 a $3 trillion addition to the net worth of U.S. households. Globally, the addition to net worth is probably around $9 trillion. I tend to think that that is more constructive, more important to outcomes, than stimulus packages that we and others could have constructed.  If that trend continues, then the Greenbook might end up looking calm in comparison, but I am probably not as bullish as that. I think that the change in net worth, the change in market cap, is indicative of principally an unwinding of some fear, an unwinding of some risk premium, and maybe a little better, the markets view of improved economic prospects.  But the benefits of the equity market 
 improvements arent confined to wealth.  We see second-order improvements in confidence, even though it is at low levels.  That is coming back slowly, but seemingly surely, to various measures of business confidence and consumer confidence.  Again, if that trend holds, we will be in awfully good shape. Let me look, after the equity markets, to a market that I havent referenced for some time, which is the convertible market.  The convertible markets are booming.  Keep in mind, as Trish and others probably discussed previously, convertible markets are a very hot or a very cold market.  The market right now is exceptionally hot.  Why is that?  I think it tells us something about investor preferences. Investors have seen markets move 20, 25, 30 percent in equity.  They say, Well, I want a bit of an equity appreciation.  At the same time, they are still a little risk averse, so they want that downside protection, all of which is making the convertible market the market of choice.  We see a range of companies, both high-quality names and lesser names, using the convertible market to raise meaningful capital.  I would say that the pipelines in the convertible market are as large as they have been in eighteen months or two years, and those markets are robust, even in this upcoming week.  I think the Greenbook talked in detail about the fixed-income markets, which continue to show some improvement, making all-in financing costs lower than I think many, including myself, would have expected them to have been when we last met.  I also see renewed interest in financial institutions issuing non-TLGP paper, which I think is a good sign, first, to try to prove 
that they are okay, different, and better, but also they are starting to feel more comfortable that the government backstops wont be around forever, and they want to differentiate themselves. With that, let me turn to financial firms and stress tests, my second point of focus.  Prior to the stress-test results, we have seen a race by the relatively strong to access these markets.  
   The capital that Goldman Sachs raised some weeks ago was much discussed, and just this morning Northern Trust raised $750 million of equity capital.  After a greenshoe option is triggered by the underwriter, it will be something closer to $900 million.  Now, the book at Northern Trustwhich markets perceive to be a relatively strong mix between a recurring revenue business and an old-fashioned bank but maybe still a bit more the formerwas good, 
healthy, but not massively oversubscribed.  I think they raised this capital at around $50 a share, trading a couple of dollars higher going into the pricing this morning.  That does tell me that 
there are marketsthat is, there is demand for high-quality names, but it is not an insatiable 
demand.  It is not massive.  Given Northern Trusts success, we should feel that, if what we do is 
effective on the stress tests, the markets will be open for some, but not all, of the names that are seeking private capital. In addition, Northern Trust, Credit Suisse, and BB&T are in the market today raising debt at yield spreads that are remarkable275 to 325 over 5-year and 10-year money. Again, this is very encouraging, probably more encouraging than I would have suspected at the last FOMC meeting. Let me turn to the aptly named stress tests.  Depending on execution, they could undermine some of the progress that is at the center of the improvements over the past several weeks. I say that because, historically, financial firms are a higher beta move on broader markets.  They have tended to track the S&P historically, at least over the last 20 years, with higher peaks and lower valleys. But they tend to be related to it.  In fact, in the last six weeks, bank stocks and financial firms generally have outperformed the broader markets.  To the extent that the financial firms suffer, I would expect them to bring down a lot of firmsor at least bring down their market capitalthat are unrelated to the banking business.  I will highlight several key issues on the stress tests, just asking the questions, but I think we have all debated them at 
   some length.  One, will regulators or markets be the predominant determinants of the fate of these 19 firms?  Two, will the firms in need of capital have six months to raise private capital or six days?  Third, is the specter of government capital confidence inducing or panic inducing? Fourth, and probably most meaningful for the broader economy, what is the resulting competitive landscape, and what is the impact of that landscape on the real economy? With that, let me turn to a third point, which is the real economy itself.  I am probably a little more anxious than the Greenbook about the economy and would leave in some of Daves 
and the teams add factors that made the judgmental forecast a little darker than model predictions for just a bit longer because of the uncertainty that is in store for us over the next few weeks. In addition, I would expect the cap-ex downside risks to be greater than the Greenbook estimates.  I would expect the turn in inventories from liquidation to modest growth to perhaps help the arithmetic of second-half growth but provide very little comfort beyond that.  I would also expect less improvement in PCE than the Greenbook, but I will have to admit that it is hard to judge. Over the long term, I continue to expect weaker GDP than the Greenbook and higher unemployment, and I suspect that is mostly because I expect a higher NAIRU and lower potential GDP in the outyears for a whole range of reasons, but maybe most simply said, because articles of faith of how this economy works have been up-ended or are in the process of being undermined.  So I am just not sure how quickly we get back to trend or whether the old trend is at all indicative of the new. On foreign growth, I think that the forecast from Nathan and his team, though encouraging, likely overstates the return of these non-U.S. economies to growth.  Whatever the path is for the United States, I expect the path for the advanced foreign economies overseas to be slower and the return to be less pronounced. In the back of my mind, the problems facing the 
  United Kingdom, Japan, and some other countriesand I hesitate to think that we would ever want to be trading places or seats with themare fundamental and much harder to get out of after a period like this. Finally, on inflation, I continue to be more worried about upside risks to inflation than downside risks. As a result, I would expect the removal of the extraordinary policy accommodation to be at a rate faster than the Greenbook suggests and be at slower-than-current market expectations.  And I expect that core inflation will remain somewhat higher than in the Greenbook over the forecast period. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In looking at the false dawn scenario, I was sobered by the degree to which the Greenbook forecast depends on the reduction in financial sector turmoil.  And I share President Rosengrens concern about the potential destabilization resulting from the announcement of the stress-test results.  I am, similarly, skeptical that government capital would spur any additional lending.  Instead, it seems that lending is going to 
be constrained by the private capital positions, which will then be evaluated in light of capital 
standards that have been implied by the stress tests.  I suspect that the most important confidence-building aspect of the stress tests may be actually the degree to which government stands ready to provide absolute support in terms of both capital and liquidity to firms in case there is a destabilizing event. In my talking to the banks that were subject to the stress test and were awaiting their results, they reported that they were surrounded by lawyers and that they had developed communication plans A, B, and C for all of their expected scenarios in terms of the results.  I 
emphasize communication plansno capital plans.  The reason for this is that they simply did 
not believe that they had any ability to raise private capital alongside government capital, and so that exercise seemed futile.  I was struck by one banker to whom I talked who went on at length about his preparations for his stress-test results, to the point that, when I hung up, I went back and checked and determined that, no, he was not covered by the stress test.  [Laughter] So I called him back and said, You know you are not covered by this.  And he said, I know, but we will be. He was absolutely convinced and had been encouraged in that belief by his 
regulators. I did talk to one who was not going to need additional capital, who was getting a strong amount of interest from private equity to repay his government capital but felt as though he would really prefer to wait about six months to separate the stress-test results from the original TARP capital injections.  Also, there were some concerns as to what might unfold in the next six months. I dont think that is unique to him.  I think that a number of companies, although they may have talked about wanting to get out of the original capital, are going to be a little less anxious than they might appear.  One bank that did give back the TARP capital has seen no improvement in its stock price and no discernible improvement anywhere else.  However, I heard from a smaller bank that did give back the capital, and the contact reported much rejoicing in his community, a surge in new customers, and congratulations all around.  But the scariest part is that his mother cried in joy and pride when he returned his government capital.  I swear. [Laughter] The amount of uncertainty about the rules and the changing of the rules are certainly limiting the effectiveness of the TARP, the TLGP, and the PPIP.  A number of firms reported that they were trying to work down their government funding but that private funding is still scarce, and no matter who their primary regulator is right now, they are dealing with multiple 
regulators for multiple programs, all with differing priorities and requirementsthe FDIC for the TLGP, the Fed for the TAF, and the Treasury for the TARP.  They also said that they cant rely on traditional correspondents.  They have been jerked around by the Home Loan Banks.  As one bank put it, at least the Fed wont redline Michigan.  [Laughter] OTTI rules have made a difference for some of the banks.  One of them reported 44 basis points on tier 1 capital, 17 basis points for first-quarter write-downs that would have occurred, and 27 basis points in the true-ups.  So the OTTI has really made a substantial difference. Earnings, obviously, were better than expected.  There are record mortgage originations that are primarily refinance, but some reports of increasing purchase activity.  Interestingly, Florida was reported to be 50/50 between refi and purchase, with the reason that the prices have dropped too much for refis to be able to take place and the low prices on foreclosures are actually attracting buyers. Mortgage income is probably sustainable through the year.  Good trust and investment income.  Loan pricing is much better than it has been historically; the deposit pricing pressure, which had been very strong in the fall, is easing a bit; and prices seem a bit more rational. For smaller banks, the margins are down 100 to 160 basis points since the start of the easing, and all banks are worried about the special FDIC assessment.  Demand is weak for new lending. They are pricing for risk. Term tightening is primarily in the higher loan-to-value.  
There is a big demand for floor plan lending.  In fact, the SBA is trying to figure out how to be helpful, but the problem is that nobody has any expertise anymore.  As the captives took over 
that business, the expertise atrophied in the other banks.  The smaller banks are still seeing demand from large bank customers, but their ability to meet that demand is becoming more and 
more strained by their liquidity and capital availability.  Deposit growth continues, although the 
 rate of growth seems to be slowing.  Transaction accounts within deposits are down almost 10 percent, and overdraft income is down more than 12 percent. Regarding credit quality, delinquencies are still growing, but they are actually more predictable and are coming up as models are predicting.  The states that are heavily affected by the auto business are seeing bigger deterioration.  The loans that are coming into collection at least now have something to work with.  Severity is growing, although some report that home prices are stabilizing. In terms of nonperforming-loan levels, a couple of banks pointed out that the nonperforming level is not necessarily the best indicator of losses because consumer loans go from delinquent or even not delinquent to charge-off.  Only the real estate loans go through the non-accrual process. Nonperformers are increasing even at those banks with low levels of problems.  As one bank president put it, if the loan officer had actually looked at the property, he would never have made the loan.  The traditional workout activity is going on, deciding which ones they can work with and which ones they need to dispose of.  Non-accruals also are growing because of the length of time for judicial foreclosures.  It now apparently takes 24 months to complete a foreclosure in the State of Florida because they are so backed up on judicial.  It used 
to take 12 months; now it is up to 24.  Then, some banks are holding their ORE for a better market. I will focus a bit on commercial real estate and the extent to which the use of CMBS and the TALF might be helpful. Eighty percent of maturities in commercial real estate are held in banks, and the CMBS targeted by the TALF actually wont take out the construction loans and is likely to affect about 20 percent of the rest. As the Vice Chairman pointed out, vacancies are up, rents are down, and cap rates are up.  Multifamily is holding up the best, then office.  Retail is very weak, and hospitality properties are a disaster.  Take-out commitments are being honored, 
but there are no new commitments.  So they are converting the maturities to a three-to-five-year mini-perm, but the appraisals are running 50 to 55 percent of those appraisals done even a year or two years ago. Once the appraisal comes in that low, it breaks the covenants, and then they 
have to request a paydown and actually put the loans on non-accrual.  They are not necessarily moving to foreclosure. They said the Street will worry about the increase in the level of non-accruals, which makes it optically expensive.  But they feel that over the long term they are much better served by waiting through this cycle in the real estate market and that the reduction in value in this cycle is not necessarily due to overbuilding but is actually due just to issues going on in the regular economy. The medium-risk properties are the ones that really need to come out of the system. One bank reported that 40 percent of non-accruals are SBA 504 program loans, 
which means that they are only 50 percent loan-to-value, because the next 40 percent is actually 
protected by SBA guarantees, but they still have to show them in non-accrual.  They are also getting mixed signals from regulators on loans in process of collection.  So as we look at issues with commercial real estate, we may be able to address some of this in the supervision and examination standards rather than necessarily trying to do anything specifically with those loans.  And that is my report, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While anchoring the last spot in the go-round has the disadvantage of addressing an audience that is weary, if not catatonic, [laughter] it does have the advantage of allowing me to endorse a consensus without having to repeat all of the reasoning that has generated it. So let me begin by agreeing with what I hear to be the prevailing view.  First, the pace of decline in the economy has slowed significantly since our last meeting.  Second, since our last meeting, we have seen some encouraging indications in the data, 
    but, Mr. Chairman, I have to say here that the one thing you may regret from your 60 Minutes appearance is the use of this phrase.  Third, there is considerable uncertainty whether these are green shoots promising blossoms to come or a school of red herring swimming across the sea of death. [Laughter] Within this broadly shared frame of reference, I would make two observations.  One, with an eye to history, relates to the uncertainty that I just noted.  The other relates to the likely duration of a recovery period once the bottom has in fact been reached.  As to history, we all know that serious recessions have their own idiosyncratic origins and run their own course.  However, in light of the mildly hopeful data in the intermeeting period, I thought it useful to ask the question whether similar signs have in the past converged in what turned out to be a false dawn and, if so, whether we can distinguish between signs of a false dawn and signs of true recovery. Looking at the last two serious economic downturns in the United Statesthe 197375 and the198182 recessionsstaff members from Dave Stocktons division provided some interesting answers. First, in both instances there was indeed a period during which hopeful signs converged that in retrospect were not harbingers of imminent stabilization and recovery but were instead followed by further deterioration.  In each case, housing starts, initial claims, PCE growth, industrial production, and equity markets all improved noticeably at approximately the same time.  That is, the signs were even more uniformly tilted toward the upside than they are at present. Second, a review of Greenbooks from the relevant periods reveals that the staff interpreted these data as indicating the end of cyclical declines. Third, what we now know to be the actual beginnings of recovery, however, were characterized by improvements in these same 
indicators at a pace not unlike that which had been seen in the earlier false dawn.  Needless to 
say, two cases do not a pattern make.  Moreover, further analysis of these and other examples might yield more finely grained conclusions.  For the present, though, this modest inquiry helps explain and, indeed, excuse our collective low levels of assurance in our assessments of current 
conditions. Let me now rehearse some reasons that I continue to tend toward the view that, even when a true turning point is reached, recovery may be much more gradualeven halting at timesthan has been our experience with economic downturns since the Second World War.  First, as noted in a number of recent studies, most recently Rogoff and Reinhart, economic 
downturns that begin with a financial crisis can be expected to be more painful and to have longer recovery periods than other serious recessions.  Although it is very difficult to disaggregate the effects of reduced demand, asset value uncertainty, and capital impairment, it seems probable that this last factor is both important and unlikely to be remedied soon, the TARP notwithstanding.  With some notable exceptions, improvements in credit markets still seem generally associated, directly or indirectly, with government support.  Indeed, to a considerable extent, our financial institutions are all still fundamentally tethered to government guarantees or support. Second, as I suggested at the last FOMC meeting, in an unusual number of industries, structural changes that were insipient even before the onset of the financial crisis, have been accelerated with the potential for extended negative effects on employment.  At the same time, sources of financing for new businesses are likely to remain constrained for some time to come. Third, as many of you have already noted, there are significant headwinds that may partially offset any positive momentum that develops.  For example, again, as you have noted, it seems likely that the considerable damage to commercial real estate markets has only begun 
working its way through the financial system, with attendant negative implications for the balance sheets of many regional banking organizations.  A somewhat different example is suggested by the possibility that many foreign economies may be lagging the U.S. downturn.  Particularly with respect to the euro area, lags in employment reduction, bank balance sheet repair, and other factors lead me to a somewhat more pessimistic view of economic performance in the coming quarters than was suggested in the Greenbook, whose alternative scenario of lower foreign economic growth produces materially negative effects on U.S. economic performance. Fourth, and finally, the likely continued fragility of the economy makes it unusually vulnerable to shocks, which could, in effect, set the reset button on the recovery effort.  Some of these potential shocks are classically economic, such as a crisis in an Eastern European country or a former Soviet Republic.  Others, such as a swine flu pandemic or adverse geopolitical developments, are truly exogenous. Neither individually, nor as a whole, do these factors have salience for our decisions at this meeting.  However, they do suggest that policy challenges may extend for a considerable periodpolicy challenges, I should say, beyond that of the unwinding of our balance sheet.  Even when dawn truly breaks, it promises to be a very slowly clearing day.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. And thank you all for a very interesting set of comments. This is a good time for us to break.  There is a reception and dinner upstairs.  No business will be conducted, just for your convenience.  We will begin tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.  
Thank you. [Meeting recessed] 
                                                      5 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). April 29Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I think we have some data to begin with. Dave. MR. STOCKTON.5  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I think folks should find the little GDP scorecard at their seats. The advance estimate for first-quarter GDP was released this morning.  The top-line GDP figure that the BEA is currently estimating, minus 6.1 percent, is very close to our estimate of minus 6.3 percent.  As usual, the offsetting errors were our friends.  [Laughter] I would point to two on the domestic spending side.  Personal consumption, as you can see, was stronger than we had estimated2.2 percent versus the 1.1 percent we had projected.  At this point, we will have to see the details to know whether there is any signal that we should take from that.  The other area that I would note is nonresidential structures, which came in at minus 44.2 percent versus the minus 26.4 percent that we were forecasting.  I guess that wont come as much of a surprise to many of you who reported incredible weakness in that area yesterday.  Some of that unexpected weakness came in the drilling and mining activity, so maybe some of those rigs that are making their way from Kansas City to Richmond got lost somewhere along the way. [Laughter] MR. HOENIG. We hope so for Richmonds sake.  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON. As you know, there are areas of missing data in this advance estimate.  In two areas, the BEA wrote down assumptions for the March missing data that are different from ours. One is imports, for which it wrote down a weaker figure for March than we are, and the other is inventories, for which it wrote down a weaker March figure than we are.  The GDP consequences of those two different assumptions, in fact, are just about offsetting.  We would be inclined to stick with our estimate at this point.  We dont really think that the BEA 
 knows anything more than we do about those particular pieces of data.  But, sticking with our assumptions, the consequences for the top line would be roughly offsetting.  Finally, on prices, you can see that the BEA is a little lower on core prices0.2 percentage point lowerthan our Greenbook estimate.  I dont think we would have any reason to second-guess them on that.  So that is the end of the report, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any questions? Okay.  I have the rare advantage of having had overnight to work out my summary of the discussion so it may be somewhat more coherent than usual.  Let me start with that.  The intermeeting period saw some tentative evidence of 
stabilization of real activity, or at least a slower decline relative to the earlier sharp contraction.  Indicators of possible stabilization appeared in data on consumption, housing, durable goods, regional manufacturing reports, and other areas.  Surveys and some anecdotal reports suggested a slightly greater confidence on the part of households and businesses.  Financial markets also generally improved.  Inventory decumulation has been brisk, suggesting possible increases in production in the medium term.  However, labor markets remained weak and global economic and financial conditions, adverse. Overall, participants were very cautious about taking too much signal from the incoming data, noting its tentative nature, particularly the improvement in the financial markets.  False dawns have occurred in previous recessions. To the extent that participants saw an upturn materializing, most thought that it would be relatively anemic because of factors such as financial headwinds, including ongoing deleveraging; the need for economic restructuring; slow global economic growth that may be lagging the U.S. cycle; and the high vulnerability of the fragile economy and financial system to shocks.  Further policy support, both in the United 
 States and abroad, would be constrained by the zero lower bound on interest rates and by the already high level of fiscal borrowing. Consumer spending shows some signs of bottoming out.  Fiscal stimulus will support consumer income going forward, and the rising stock market and possibly slower declines in house prices imply that wealth is no longer dropping so sharply.  There are at best, however, only the slightest indications of improvement in labor markets.  Unemployment claims and job losses remain high; firms are undertaking permanent reductions in labor force; and involuntary part-time work is unusually elevated.  Housing activity is giving some indications of stabilizing at a very low level, with affordability and buyer traffic up and inventories down.  However, prices 
are likely to continue to fall, in part because of the additions to supply from high rates of foreclosure. Production and investment remain weak, although firms attitudes are not quite as negative as they recently were.  Drilling and mining have been affected by commodity prices.  Export demand remains depressed.  Industrial production has continued to fall both here and abroad, and growth rates in both advanced and emerging-market economies have fallen significantly. China is somewhat stronger than other Asian countries, but perhaps not as strong as its official statistics imply; and like many other countries, it remains dependent on export demand.  Europe faces slow growth and potentially serious banking problems, including 
exposures to Eastern Europe. Financial market conditions generally had a better tone.  Stock prices rose, money markets exhibited better liquidity and lower spreads, corporate issuance of bonds and convertible securities is healthy, volatility is down, and other indicators of market functioning have improved.  Better financial conditions have helped confidence, even as indications of economic 
 improvement have reduced risk aversion in markets.  However, financial markets had shown signs of improvement on several previous occasions before worsening again.  Moreover, although banks generally reported good earnings in the first quarter and their share prices rose, confidence in banksas shown in CDS spreads, for exampleremains tenuous.  A number of people observed that the disclosure of the capital assessment results on Monday will be a stress test in itself for the banks and the markets.  Credit continues to contract because of declining credit quality and loan demand, capital constraints on banks that dont want to base increased lending on government capital, and the unavailability of financing through securitization markets.  Lack of financing for commercial real estate remains a particularly serious issue.   Most see inflation as remaining low for the foreseeable future.  Slack looks to be high and increasing, as reflected in high unemployment and low capacity utilization.  Wages are growing more slowly.  With the slight improvement in the outlook and the incoming inflation data not particularly low, deflation risks have moderated but remain a worry for some participants. On the other hand, some expressed concerns about upside inflation risks, reflecting the possibility that the output gap is being overestimated and that forward-looking expectations may react to factors such as the Feds rapid balance sheet expansion and its purchases of 
Treasury securities. Effective exit strategies from Fed policies and good communication are necessary to maintain confidence that price stability will be achieved. So that is my overview.  Any comments or questions?  If not, let me make just a few comments, as usual. I am after Governor Tarullo, and so it is even more difficult for me than for him to come up with something new.  On the proverbial green shoots, [laughter] we all want to 
be cautious, but it is nevertheless better to see good news than to see bad news, and we have seen some nascent signs of improvement.  Although they are small, subject to revision, and so on, 
    they do occur across a number of areas, and so that is a positive.  But, of course, I agree that we need to be very cautious about overinterpreting what are still relatively modest changes. I am reminded of a comment I heard on MSNBC while I was watching Tim Geithners press conference after the G7. Tim had said something to the effect that the rate of decline had slowed, and the commentator said, Well, if you close all the factories in the first quarter, the rate of growth will stop declining. I think one area that we all do feel somewhat better about is the financial markets.  There has been a range of improvements in areas where the Fed has been involved but also in other areas like the corporate markets.  A wide range of volatility and stress measures have also looked a bit better, and we saw a bit of improvement in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  It could be that we are seeing a bit of the adverse feedback loop working in the other direction, which is, of course, good. The markets, in turn, have responded to some extent to improved news, and higher stock markets, for example, have helped confidence and probably spurred some extra consumer spending.  But, again, back to the theme of not overinterpreting or overextrapolating, we have seen how quickly those gains can be lost. As we look at the economy and try to think about where it is going, it is useful to have on two sets of glassesboth a short-term cyclical-dynamic set of glasses and a medium-term adjustment set of glasses.  On the short-run cyclical dynamics, we are seeing what may be the working-through of a classic inventory cycle.  The GDP data just shown were a striking contrast between the fourth quarter and the first quarter in terms of the composition of final demand versus inventory decumulation.  In that respect, it is encouraging that inventories are moving back toward balance. The Greenbook sees that process as ongoing, with inventory decumulation in the second quarter being about as large as in the first quarter.  Nevertheless, obviously, as that 
 cycle proceeds, we will perhaps see some improvement in production.  Of course that depends on seeing stabilization in final demand, which ultimately drives the short-run cycle, and there are a lot of risks here. People have talked about the risks to commercial real estate, other construction, trade, and so on. The key element, as usual, will be the consumer, and I do think that the improvement in the first quarter is not entirely a fluke.  I think there are some signs of improvement in that area, notably that wealth is not declining as quicklythe stock market and housing prices are not falling as much.  We saw a rather marked increase in sentiment yesterday.  Fiscal policy is going to be supportive of consumer spending.  Credit is tight but probably not getting worse.  The main uncertainty there, as a number of you pointed out, is the labor market.  Until we see a bit of improvement there, that will remain a major source of uncertainty.  But in 
the surveys and so on, we have seen just a bit of indication that consumers see strengthening in the labor market. So the combination of some potential stabilization in final demand and the working-through of the inventory dynamics does give some hopeagain, with all the caveats that 
everyone has expressedthat we will see somewhat better economic growth performance in the next couple of quarters and possibly even the end of the technical recession by the fall.  In thinking about that, though, we should also keep in mind not just the short-run growth dynamics but also the amplitude of this whole episode.  Burns and Mitchell, in their original classic work, divided the business cycle into six stages, which were of indeterminate length.  And the bigger the recession, the longer each of the cycles six stages was.  Obviously, the shock that hit the economy in the fall of last year was enormous, and it was global.  So even if we see the usual inventoryfinal demand dynamics working through, that combined with the restraining effects of financial stress and the like suggests that this will be a slower, deeper cyclical pattern than is 
    normal.  So, to summarize, on the cyclical side, while Governor Tarullos examples of false dawns are very instructive, I think there is a decent chance that we will see some improvement in the near term. The other perspective, however, which I think is very important and a number of people pointed out, is the medium-term constraints and dynamics that affect the economy.  Unfortunately, our economy still has a significant number of very serious imbalances that need to be resolved before it can grow at a healthy pace. Just to list five. First, the leverage issue of both the financial and the household sectors.  Second, wealthincome ratios are well below normal, and therefore more saving is needed to rebuild those ratios.  Third, we have dramatic fiscal imbalances, which have to be reconciled at some point.  Fourth, we have current account imbalances, which are at least temporarily down, but the Greenbook forecast for the medium term is that there is probably some worsening in that dimension.  And fifth, as a number of people mentioned, the unemployment we are seeing is probably not mostly a temporary-layoff type of unemployment.  There is a lot of reallocation going on.  The financial and the construction sectors are probably not going to be as big in the future as they have been recently, so there will need to be that readjustment across sectors. If you put all of those imbalances together and you think about what is going to support sustainable economic growth, it is a little hard to see where a robust recovery is going to come from.  In particular, consumption is unlikely to be dynamic, as President Trichet would put it, because of leverage and the need to build wealth and because of lower employment and those factors. The government sector is unlikely to be a major support indefinitely because of the need to rebalance the fiscal budget. Therefore, by arithmetic, that leaves only two categories, which are investment and net exports.  A capital boom would be very good news.  Among other things, 
                                                   it would help solve some of these reallocation problems and allow new industries to expand or to grow. But it is not obvious where that is going to come from, and the financial constraints are also a drag on that direction. Finally, what we really and truly need, as we have been saying for many years, is a rebalancing of global demand that would allow the United States to have better external demand.  Again, there are some preliminary steps in that direction, notably in China and a few other countries that are beginning to understand that full reliance on exports is not necessarily a safe strategy. But that is not likely to be a near-term solution. So when you look at the economy from both of these short-term dynamic and medium-term dynamic approaches, the conclusion is that we may have some improvement this year.  That, of course, is hostage to financial conditions and to consumer behavior and attitudes.  But I dont see much scope for a stronger recovery.  I could be wrong.  There are things going in that direction, such as the depth of the recession, which may at some point mean a stronger recovery.  But it is difficult to see the underlying factors that will lead to a powerful recovery in the near term, and so we will have to deal with that.  The implications for policy, as people have pointed out, are not entirely unambiguous because, to the extent that slow growth reflects things like reallocation and changes in the structure of the economy, it is as much a potential growth issue as it is an aggregate demand issue.  So that is my assessment.  Unless there is any comment or 
question, let me turn now to the policy round, and I will call on Brian.  MR. MADIGAN.6  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package labeled Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.  The April Bluebook presented two basic policy alternatives for your consideration.  Under alternative A, the Committee would buy an additional $450 billion of Treasury securities on top of its already announced plans to purchase up to $1.75 trillion of Treasury, agency, and mortgage-backed securities.  Under alternative B, the Committee would maintain its previously announced plans.  The Bluebook also offered a variant of alternative B, dubbed B, which translates the announced total purchases of securities and time frames into monthly dollar amounts and monthly 6 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
      growth rates of the Systems securities portfolio.  Turning to page 2, this morning we have proposed a change to the first paragraph of all the alternatives (shown in red) in order to be more consistent with the economic data released this morning and with the general sense that household spending could be leveling out. That proposed change is applied to all of the alternatives in the packet. The Committee might adopt the further expansion of its securities portfolio proposed in alternative A if it thinks that the economic outlook under its current policy path is unacceptably weak and believes that the advantages of providing additional monetary policy stimulus through expanded large-scale asset purchases would outweigh the disadvantages. Under the staffs analysis, the outlook is indeed quite weak. Although economic activity bottoms out around the middle of this year, the recovery remains tepid until mid-2010.  The staff sees the economy expanding at a pace below that of potential GDP through the first quarter of next yeareven though potential growth is temporarily held down by financial strains and the need to reallocate resourcesso the unemployment rate rises to 9 percent by the end of this year and only edges lower next year.  In the extended Greenbook baseline forecast, 
the Committee is assumed to hold the federal funds rate at its effective lower bound 
until 2013. Those very low short-term interest rates, together with the lagged effects of the Committees large-scale asset purchases and other policies to support financial markets, strengthen financial institutions, and boost spending eventually produce sufficient repair of balance sheets in the financial and household sectors and enough aggregate demand to spur growth to 4 percent in 2011 and tilt the trajectory of unemployment down more noticeably.  But the staff projects that, even with these policies, the economy does not return to full employment until late 2013, f
half years from now.  In the staff forecast, core PCE prices rise at an average annual rate of less than 1 percent over the next five years, well below the 2 percent rate that the majority of you view as consistent with your dual mandate.  While your own forecasts generally point to somewhat higher inflation than foreseen by the staff, you still anticipate inflation to be below 2 percent over the next three years.  If you judge that the outlook for economic activity is excessively sluggish and inflation is likely to be on the low side of its optimal level, you might be inclined to provide additional monetary stimulus by expanding your large-scale asset purchases.  Market participants appear to put only small odds on an expansion of your securities purchases today, so the announcement of an additional $450 billion of Treasury purchases might lower longer-term interest rates, including private rates, by 20 to 45 basis points. Although these estimates are subject to great uncertainty, such a reduction might raise the level of real GDP after three years by  percent to 1 percent relative to baseline and lower the unemployment rate 0.1 to 0.5 percentage point in 
2011. The language proposed for alternative A does not differ markedly from that used by the Committee in its March statement, but as I noted, the material shown in red is less downbeat than both the March language and that proposed in the Bluebook.  
Also, relative to March, the reference to declining equity wealth has been dropped in 
      view of the rebound in stock prices over the intermeeting period, and the sentence on the slump in U.S. exports and recession abroad has been omitted.  However, to explain the motivation for undertaking the additional policy action of alternative A, the final sentence of the first paragraph would indicate the Committees anticipation that economic activity will continue to contract in the near term and that the subsequent recovery could be sluggish. The second paragraph, on inflation, is essentially the same as in March, but it uses a slight variant of the language to refer to inflation rates that are most consistent with sustainable economic growth.  That revised wording is employed to avoid suggesting that inflation fosters economic growth, but this improvement may not be worth the costs in terms of market analysts 
wondering what subtle message the Committee is sending by making the change. The third paragraph of alternative A modifies the corresponding paragraph of the March statement to indicate the expansion in the asset purchases but otherwise explains the Committees intentions in essentially the same way, referring to a total quantity of asset purchases spread out over specified time periods this year.  Another 
change in language is to note explicitly that asset purchases will be state contingent by indicating that the Committee is prepared to make further adjustments to the timing and overall amounts of these purchases of Treasury, agency, and mortgage-backed securities as appropriate in view of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The penultimate sentence now references the Feds liquidity programs generally rather than specifically citing the TALF, as in the most 
recent three statements; this change might be desirable in view of the TALFs slow start. In considering whether to expand asset purchases, the Committee would need to balance a number of factors, including the baseline outlook for both economic growth and inflation, the risks around that outlook, and the benefits, costs, and uncertainties of a further expansion. In your forecast submissions, several of you indicated that you were concerned that the Committees large-scale asset purchases and other programs that expand the Systems balance sheet could unanchor inflation 
expectations. More generally, as I noted yesterday, many of you projected noticeably higher inflation in 2011 than does the staff, even with somewhat less economic growth. A sense that the risks to inflation relative to the Committees objectives were more nearly balanced than suggested by the staff forecast might incline the Committee to pause at this meeting, as under alternative B, on page 3.  A decision to stand pat might also be supported by a judgment that the Federal Reserve and the government have now put in place a range of effective programs to support credit flows and economic activityprograms whose effects on the real economy and inflation will be evident only with a considerable lag.  Finally, the Committee may be encouraged by recent information suggesting that the deterioration in the economy may be slowing. 
      Paragraph 1 for alternative B is largely the same as that for alternative A, including the reference to some easing in financial conditions and the modified passage shown in red, but the final sentences do not express an expectation that the recovery will be sluggish. As in March, the final clause refers to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth. The paragraph on inflation is identical to that in the March statement.  The third paragraph, on policy actions, is 
substantively similar to that used in March; in particular, the Committee would make no change to its program of large-scale asset purchases.  The third sentence from the end would note that the timing and overall amounts of its asset purchases may be adjusted in view of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets, as in alternative A.  Unless that sentence is interpreted as suggesting that the Committee is leaning toward expanding or contracting its asset purchases, an announcement along the lines of alternative B seems unlikely to prompt much market reaction. Alternative B, page 4, is identical to alternative B except that, in response to suggestions from Presidents Bullard and Plosser, we included text (highlighted in yellow) that translates the dollar amounts and time frames of future asset purchases into monthly average dollar amounts and monthly average growth rates of the Systems securities portfolio.  Some readers may find the additional information 
helpful; others may find confusing the proliferation of numbers that results from expressing the Committees unchanged plans for asset purchases in three different ways. Also attached for your reference on pages 5 and 6 are alternatives B and B as proposed by Presidents Bullard and Plosser.  These alternatives are, again, substantively the same as B and B. But they provide the material in a different order by beginning with a paragraph on the Committees policy decision, then presenting the two paragraphs on the rationale, and concluding with various points, including the Committees intention to monitor the size and composition of the balance sheet.  It is worth noting that B and B cover the federal funds rate target in this final paragraph rather than in the introductory paragraph.  A key difference from B and B is the way that B and B quantify the plans for asset purchases.  Under alternative B, the Committee would specify numerically only a monthly growth rate of 18 to 20 percent for its security holdings, rather than the total dollar stock of planned purchases; the 
announcement states that that the specified growth rate is consistent with the Committees already announced plans.  Alternative B would take a similar approach but would articulate the growth of the securities portfolio in dollar terms rather than percentage terms.   Finally, let me note that we distributed to you this morning a corrected exhibit from my briefing yesterday on your economic projections.  No central tendencies or ranges that I discussed were affected.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Brian? President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, listening to your presentation and some of the discussions yesterday, I am a little confused about the way the policy options are presented. I know there will be a discussion about the rate of purchases, but it does seem as though the policies that we are implementing, as I was talking about with Vice Chairman Dudley beforehand, have a cliff-like nature to them in the sense that we have a pace for purchases and then were just going to stop under the current implementation by the Desk.  The Desk, I suppose, is charged with the responsibility of inferring a path that the Committee hasnt really specified, and it feels very incomplete.  We are almost surely locking ourselves into a future action in order to smooth that cliff-like purchase behavior, which we just havent discussed.  I am not saying that I disagree with any of that, but it feels different from the way we have always talked about the funds rate policy in the past, when we could take an action and choose to not do that the next time.  There seem to be future ramifications from these actions.  So do we leave it to the Desk to infer how to implement the additional, say, $300 billion of Treasury purchases as opposed to telling them that, in addition, there is a plan that, if this is the entire amount to be done, it should tail off in some smooth fashion? MR. MADIGAN. Well, of course, the Committee issues a directive to the Desk, and my understanding of the directiveand Trish may want to comment on thisis that the Committee has essentially instructed the Desk to carry out the purchases that are specified at rates that roughly average the amounts specified by the Committee but that also potentially take into account market conditions. 
Now, you are raising a separate issue, which relates to the questions that Presidents Bullard and Plosser have raised.  It is, Whats the longer-run path or the longer-run plan for the Committees open market purchases?  I agree that, in an ideal world, the Committee would articulate a fully blown plan for its monetary policy settings over the indefinite future.  I think that is difficult to do in practice.  One way to look at this is that the world will surely turn out differently, either better or worse, from the way we currently see it in terms of the baseline projection, and eventually the Committee will need to adjust its plans for large-scale asset purchases and other monetary policy settings like the federal funds rate.  That could conceivably mean that later this year, for instance, the Committee scales back its large-scale asset purchases or expands them.  So I do not think that the way that the Committee has already expressed its statement or its directive to the Desk rules out those adjustments at some point in the future.  It just doesnt make clear at this point what those will be in the absence of information about how the economy and the outlook will progress. MS. MOSSER. I would agree with that. Two comments.  The first is that there really is no cliff-like expectation in the market right now.  The good news is that we have a lot of credibility that were not going to stop abruptly one day. MR. EVANS. But we get all of that from your presentation. MS. MOSSER. Right, and in fact, if you look at the latest primary dealer survey, to a firm practically, there is an expectation, regardless of the level effect, that the wind-down will be smooth.  The timing of that varies from respondent to respondent, but the expectation is that we will not all of a sudden stop buying on December 30 or 31 of this year, particularly in Treasuries on September 30. 
My second comment has to do more with the actual implementation.  Is steady as she goes the right approach versus some another approach to purchasing, given that we are uncertain about the endpoint and how slowly we might wind these down?  My comments here are really dependent upon the program were talking about.  The MBS programpurchasing MBS, the issuance of MBSis very lumpy.  Weshe-goes plan in purchasing MBS, given the current directive we have, in the next two or three months because there is a huge refinancing wave coming through and, if we dont purchase, mortgage rates will rise or rise more than we want them to. If that is the way the market dynamics turn out, that is the Desks intent in terms of instructing our investment managers.  So were well prepared to be very flexible there and perhaps come back to the Committee with a warning at some point to say that we are well ahead of a steady pace, but our expectation is that purchases will taper off.  Or we could come back and 
say, if we want to keep this program going, then what is the Committees view about increasing the size?  As Brian noted, we dont know which of those scenarios we may face, but those are the scenarios. The agency debt purchase program similarly, honestly, is very dependent upon the financing needs of the GSEs. It is possible that the program might actually pull back early, if their portfolios shrink and there is less debt out there and less need to support the market in order to support the agency market.  Then again, if the GSEs portfolios grow and our mandate is still to purchase, we may be lumpier in how we purchase those securities.  Treasuries are different because of the steady issuance. Because we know that the Treasury Department is going to be issuing just a huge amount of debt at a steady pace and we also know, particularly for Treasuries, that the announcement effect may be as important as anything else in terms of lowering the level 
of interest rates, we are more inclined toward steady as she goes in purchasing there.  So the problem that youre worried about and the cliff effect may perhaps be more relevant from an operational standpoint to the Treasury purchase program than to the other two programs. MR. EVANS. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I am sure that this is covered in some of the write-ups, but could you walk through how the number 450 billion was selected and what other numbers were considered? MR. MADIGAN. I would see this in the context of the overall set of materials that the staff has provided to the Committee, especially at the last meeting and this meeting, and the various attempts that weve made to calibrate the different amounts of asset purchases to 
evolving economic conditions and their effects on the economy.  We didnt look carefully or specifically at a whole range of options.  Basically these would be viewed as linear, and if the Committee were inclined to go with the smaller number, then the effects on the economy and interest rates would be correspondingly smaller, and vice versa for larger purchases. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Part of the cliff nature is that weve stated specific end dates, originally six months and now by autumn, and with regard to the mortgage-backed securities, we stated by the end of the year. I would just like some clarification on the comment you made, Trish, about understanding the lumpy nature of the mortgage-backed securities market and whether or not the agencies need more financing.  What caught my ear was your comment about Treasuries and that that is what the community expects.  Were going to even this out since theres constant issuance 
   over the time frame that we articulated.  In creating that cliff, were committed to that.  But was your comment that they expect us to do more when this is over? MS. MOSSER. Yes. The market expectation is absolutely MR. FISHER. It will continue to grow this over time after we have run the course of what we previously stated. MS. MOSSER. In the Treasury program, yes. 
MR. FISHER. And to what extent? 
MS. MOSSER. I showed the average. Our dealer survey had an average of the program that the sizes total to approximately $500 billion, but their estimates there are quite skewed.  A number of individuals expect that the program will be $750 billion, along the lines of what it is in alternative A. In fact, I would also say that, in the dealer survey, we asked economists for 
their opinions. If we asked the Treasury traders for their opinions, I think we would probably get an average or a median expectation that the Treasury program would be even larger than $500 billion. But it is the one program that all market participants say will be both extended, partly because its terminal date is earlier than the mortgage and agency one, and expanded by a sizable amount. MR. FISHER. And that larger number would be what percentage of the expected issuance? I dont have your charts from yesterday. MS. MOSSER. It would still be only about half. 
MR. FISHER. In terms of the larger number that you gave? 
MS. MOSSER. Yes, even the larger number would be about half. 
MR. FISHER. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. If I understand your comments correctly, the Committee has effectively committed to more than what we said, according to the private sectors view of what were going to do, and probably more than what the Committee is going to dobecause, if we dont believe our own cliff, its just not credible.  Its not a credible commitment to say were just going to stop all at once at a point in time. MS. MOSSER. Yes, thats correct.  In terms of cliff effects, because of the lumpiness, if the market conditions are appropriate, it will be easier, for example, to slow down quickly the purchases of MBS and, to a degree, the purchases of agency debt.  The Treasury piece will be the part for which, because of the smooth issuance and the expectations, from an operational 
standpoint, we would guess that a smoother slowdown would be a more advisable implementation strategy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Id like to say, though, that I dont see any reason that you couldnt say that were going to extend this three months but were going to have a tapering off. MS. MOSSER. Absolutely. Our recommendation would be that, if the Committee has been clear about their intentions that its not needed, we would put on a timetablewere now publishing a schedule two weeks in advance; we dont put in the quantities, but we put in the section of the curveand we would make clear that were going to diminish our purchases over time. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? Okay.  If not, we are ready for our policy go-round. Let me start with President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Committee has embarked on a strategy of working on all fronts to combat the severe economic downturn and continuing problems in 
our financial intermediation sector.  The recent return of some relative stability in financial 
  markets is, of course, welcome.  But I believe it remains fragile.  In particular, as many noted yesterday, I think that the pending release of the banks supervisory stress tests has the potential to be very disruptive to markets. Lets hope that doesnt happen. Like many of you, I agree that the type of recovery we are likely to see is going to be modest, but my reasoning and my view of that modest recovery is somewhat different from those 
perhaps expressed through the Greenbook. As I tried to articulate yesterday, my view of the 
decline in equilibrium output is driven by a severe shock to the financial intermediation sector.  
It might be not only large but also fairly persistent.  Wthan-normal unemployment ratessectoral reallocations as the Chairman is referring toand 
perhaps imbalances that the economy must work through in response to that shock.  Thus, GDP will be lower and unemployment rates will be higher.  The main difference such a view has for 
the outlook, compared with the Greenbook view, is the models implications for output gaps, inflation, and policy paths.  In this equilibrium story, the real allocations must occur, but it is dubious that the policy actions can do much to prevent those costs from occurring.  This view also implies that gaps are smaller and less downward pressure on inflation is present, and thus the appropriate policy paths under consideration would be less expansive in order to constrain inflation. Turning to policy, I think we face some very big challenges and uncertainties.  The Board has now approved another expansion in eligible collateral for the TALF, with the previous expansion announced just a month ago.  And the staff is considering even further collateral expansions, including legacy assets, with recommendations expected in the next few weeks.  It seems as though we are in a cycle in which we announce interventions in one market or asset 
 type and then almost immediately turn around and consider other interventions in other markets and other asset types. Clearly, our intention is to improve market functioning in these sectors.  But I am increasingly uncomfortable with the practice, and I am concerned that our announcementsand indeed the whole strategy of gradually expanding the breadth and scope of our interventions across both asset classes and maturitiesare another source of instability in the marketplace.  I am not certain that we have adequately evaluated the interactions among all of these programs or that we have an adequate sense of the marginal benefit of the incremental actions that we are undertaking. Moreover, can we be sure that our programs are not distorting markets, discouraging the return of participants who are waiting on the sidelines for the next great deal or subsidy from the Federal Reserve policies, and hampering the development of new, sustainable market mechanisms for raising capital and allocating credit, thus actually delaying financial market recovery? As I have said before, I am not against expanding our balance sheet, given the current economic conditions and outlook.  I do prefer that expansion be done with more-liquid government securities, such as Treasuries rather than MBS, relative to illiquid private securities.  I am troubled by our difficulty in quantitatively determining what might be the right amount of expansion that is appropriate.  Nevertheless, given our current commitments, I am against announcing any further increases today. The change in the forecast, and certainly in the Greenbook and many peoples forecasts since March, doesnt seem to warrant further expansions. I think we need to give our actions time to work. Thus I favor some version of B, B, B, or B. [Laughter]  That narrows it down quite a bit. I would also prefer, in general, that we be more explicit about the linkage between our 
  policy actions and our inflation goals.  We mention in paragraph 1 that our policy actions will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth, yet in paragraph 2 we give only a forecast for inflation with no mention of our related policy actions.  This seems to me oddly asymmetric.  By failing to link our balance sheet expansion with our inflation goals, we fail to communicate an important and explicit aspect of our policy.  We dont say, for example, that we are taking these actions in part to help ensure that we avoid deflation or, given that we are operating at an effective lower bound, having inflation slightly higher would not be unwelcome.  By failing to make this link to our policy actions and our inflation goal, we are not being as transparent as we could be, and I think we risk the publics breaking the link between our actions and inflation, thus potentially weakening our credibility and our ability to maintain those well-anchored expectations. Short of being explicit about adopting an inflation target, we could, for example, create more of a link by slightly modifying paragraphs 2 and 3.  I am working off of B rather than B for now. We could strike the second sentence in paragraph 2 on inflationif Im looking at the right onewhere we say, Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term.  We could strike that sentence and change the first sentence of paragraph 3 to read, In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to forestall any risk that inflation could persist for a sustained period of time below rates consistent with price stability.  In other words, I think we need to make sure that the actions we take link to our inflation objectives more directly. As I suggested yesterday, I think we are at risk of generating substantial inflation in the not-too-distant future, and that is particularly so in the policy path described in the Greenbook.  
     Its useful to remind ourselves that the high inflation episode in the 1970s is a case study of a rapid monetary expansion in the context of an apparently substantial output gap, and the overreliance on and overstatement of poorly measured estimates of an output gap and a reluctance to make the difficult decision to reverse accommodation in a timely fashion contributed to very bad economic outcomes in that episode.  I believe the current situation poses an eerily similar set of circumstances and conditions, and we must be careful not to repeat that unpleasant experience.  Im troubled by the challenge that we face in determining how we will decide when weve done enough. As Ive noted several times, Im skeptical of relying too heavily on interest rate spreads as the sole criterion. More generally, Im uncomfortable with the communication of our actions.  The memo that President Bullard and I circulated last Friday tries to address some of these concerns.  We 
have proposed language that reinforces the notion that our policy is state contingent and that we are on a policy path rather than focused on one-time announcements for the purchase of some class of securities, be they MBS or Treasuries, of some magnitude usually expressed in some round number of billions of dollars without any explanation as to where those numbers come from, much as President Lockharts question is about where the $450 billion came from.  I think our recent statements may be creating more uncertainty than necessary about what the FOMC will do next in terms of announcing new quantities or new purchases of assets.  The current approach will leave the impression, as was just discussed, that we will stop purchasing assets 
suddenly, cold turkey, and perhaps face the cliff problem that was just discussed. So Id like to spend just another minute, Mr. Chairman, to make some comments about B and B from my standpoint just so the Committee understands a little where we are coming from.  We did two or three things that we think are pertinent and important.  First, we moved the 
   action up to the first paragraph, which is more consistent, we believe, with the traditional way in which weve structured our policy statements.  We also took seriously the notion that we have made commitments.  Rather than providing a litany of numbers, we think that we would just say in the first sentence, Treasury securities.  We purchased Treasury securities, agency debt, and MBS in a manner consistent with our previous announcements.  That suggests two things. One, in our previous announcements the Committee was explicit about saying that we would purchase up to a certain amount.  It doesnt guarantee either that we would get there or that we might not exceed it, but it does say up to.  I think it is important that we maintain that flexibility, and we think that our language helps ensure that. We also chose to focus on the asset side of the balance sheet, as the Chairman has many times discussed the issue of focusing on assets rather than on the liabilities.  We also note that we retain flexibility as to how the Desk would actually implement this.  Trish just gave us an example of the lumpiness of some of this thing.  This does not say that we would purchase every asset at the same pace, but it talks about the general pace of expansion of the balance sheet, and the Desk would have some flexibility to implement that depending on the nature of the securities that they were purchasing. In the staffs B version, we were troubled by the expression 20 percent per month for a given period of time, which ignores compounding problems.  If you did follow 20 percent per month literally, we would actually far exceed the purchases that we announced.  So we chose to focus on growing the balance sheet and the total purchase of these securities by, we said, 18 to 20 percent per month over the near term because as, the balance sheet grows, the growth rate would actually start to decline.  We thought it would be better to express it that way than over a longer period. The log of 1 plus r approaches r when r is small, but when r is 20 percent, those approximations dont work very well anymore.  Finally, in the first paragraph we make very 
   explicit, as Brian suggested, that the Committee stands ready to adjust both the timing and the overall amounts of its purchases as the economy evolves, and thats the important conditionality. We believe that trying to move to a statement that looks like this will not only help us communicate to the markets that we are on a pathan important path, we thinkbut also preserve our flexibility in terms of conditionality.  We also believe that having a statement structured more like this will help us when the time comes to start an exit strategy.  This gives us more flexibility in expressing what we believe the policy path may be.  I will leave it at that.  
Thank you for the extra time, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate it. By the way, I also want to compliment and thank the staff.  Brian and I had several conversations over the last several weeks talking about how to do this, and the staff were very helpful and very accommodating, and I just want to express my appreciation for the interactions that led to these suggestions. So thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have just one small comment.  I appreciate your doing what I asked, which is to work in advance and provide a concrete alternative, which I think is very helpful. I have a question about B versus Bthe 18 to 20 percent versus the $160 billion per month.  I think a problem with the 18 to 20 percent is, of course, that if we follow our plan, a week from now well be announcing 15 to 18 percent or something, and that could be misconstrued as a change in our strategy.  It isnt quite as transparent in that respect.  So in doing this, my inclination would be to go with the dollar number.  But I just raise that point. MR. PLOSSER. Well, thats why the B was there. That was part of the discussion, to figure out whats the best way to express that.  But, again, I think thats a point worth discussing.  I dont feel as strongly about that as I do some other pieces. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
  MR. HOENIG. Thank you. I guess as we consider all the options, I do prefer alternative B and not the primes.  I guess Im more concerned about and more interested in the fact that we are increasing our balance sheet by the extent that we are, and Im not enamored of the idea of doing that and saying, Heres the path that were going to take.  Im more concerned about the amount than I am whether we have a path, because thats the striking point.   I also like the wording in the sense that the Committee under any of these is prepared to adjust the timing and the amounts.  If you think about how much the projections have changed in the Greenbook, for example, from the last meeting to this meeting and if we are near the bottom, things could change, and I think the Committee would need to reconsider even the amounts at another meeting.  The wording in the B alternative allows us to do this. I did note and am very much appreciative of the work that the staff did on the projections on the balance sheet because I think it does point out that, if we go to these sizes, we have some real challenges ahead of us.  I think the June meeting is extremely important in terms of thinking about an exit strategy. Thats very important because, if we do achieve the total amount under the mortgage-backed securities, our holdings will be larger than those of either Fannie or Freddie, and thats a striking statement as far as our role in the economy goes.  That gives me some pause.  So B is fine. I hope that the next meeting will show even more positive news and we can adjust these numbers going forward.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative A.  The Greenbook projection, with which I broadly concur, assumes no change from our announced asset purchases. It foresees unemployment remaining above 9 percent through the end of 2010 and 
 inflation well below our preferred rate for even longer.  I consider this unacceptable in light of our mandates.  I think we need to do more to get the economy moving forward. I think our actions at the last meeting provided compelling evidence that purchases of longer-term Treasury securities worked to bring down borrowing rates and improved financial conditions more broadly. Now that weve tested the waters, its time to wade in by substantially increasing our purchases of Treasury securities.  In fact, I could support increasing the amount beyond $750 billion and would consider including securities of durations down to one year.  The latter step would be aimed at bringing down one-year and two-year rates that are well above those consistent with our expectations for the future path of policy.  Now, we could wait until our June meeting to take this step, but the question to my mind is why we would wait.  As with the funds rate, I dont see a reason to keep our powder dry.  So I prefer to take appropriate, bold action to stimulate the economy sooner rather than later. Regarding the best way to communicate our asset purchases to the public, I strongly support the approach that we have taken so far and see no reason to change it.  Our statements provide clear information on the expected size and duration of each of our asset purchase 
programs.  Economic theory suggests that it is the size of the cumulative asset purchase relative to the size of the market that affects the yield and, therefore, the stance of monetary policy.  In other words, it is aggregate purchases, not the growth rate, that matters.  This is an important point because it implies that our communications should focus on levels or, alternatively, on the shares of the outstanding stock that we hold and not on changes or growth rates.  A focus on growth rates or changes would confuse our message, and I therefore would consider it a mistake.  I also think its important to report the various types of asset purchases separately rather than as a sum because their effects on financial conditions and the economy may differ. 
   Our statements do leave open the question of what we will do once the announced purchases have been completed, but this ambiguity is appropriate given the high degree of uncertainty about the outlook and the effectiveness of the asset purchases.  Indeed, were already far clearer about our projections of asset purchases than we have ever been about the future path of the funds rate. So perhaps the change we should be considering is how to better communicate the funds rate path we think is most likely. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Just to ask a questionwould the Desk interpret alternative A as a greater pace of purchases or just pushing it out to the end of the plan? MS. MOSSER. Given this size, it would be a greater pace as well.  It would be like the mortgage program.  Were purchasing Treasuries at $50 billion per month.  The $500 billion that was in the dealer survey would be a steady pace, so to go to $750 billion would be increasing the pace. MR. EVANS. Would it be over the entire currently envisioned purchase time, or would some of it be pushed beyond that? MS. MOSSER. It would depend on what the Committee asked us to do.  If the directive is to extend it through December, then we would spread it out over whatever time frame the Committee gives us. MR. EVANS. I am just asking whether or not further clarification would be required. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Trish, on President Yellens suggestion of shortening maturities, that has the other benefit of making our exit strategy easier. MS. MOSSER. Yes, it does. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Do you see similar market benefits of mixing in moto-three-year maturities, for example? MS. MOSSER. There would probably be some market benefits at the front end of the curve. Theres no question that the one-to-two-year section of the curve reacted less than the section further out.  Thats probably because a lot more issuance is there, and so the quantity were buying relative to supply is a little smaller.  And if we did it pretty explicitly, particularly between one and two years, were guessing that it would steepen the yield curve; but we hope that, if it was announced, that additional purchases across the curve would have an announcement effect of bringing the whole curve down.  So for that portion of the curve we think that it would be useful in bringing yields down. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It would do less, though, to bring down mortgage rates.  So it really depends a little on why you are purchasing the Treasuries. Are you purchasing the Treasuries to bring down mortgage rates, or are you purchasing Treasuries to steepen the yield curve? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN. The same logic could apply to mortgage-backed securities, though, because you could do 3-, 5-, and 7-year mortgage-backed securities, and that has the opposite story. Those would not be as deep, and so you might have a bigger impact if you did the shorter maturities.  Unlike changing the maturity on the Treasuries, arguably youd have a bigger impact if you changed the maturities and bought ARMs rather than the 15- and 30-year fixed.  Thats also something that might be worth thinking about because the ARM rates havent come down 
   very much.  So if youre looking at a 30-year fixed, a 15-year fixed, and a 7-year ARM, the 7-year ARM hasnt moved all that much, for example. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Yes, but the relative depth of the market matters in only a habitat kind of view, in which case the spillover to other markets is commensurately lower even if youre having 
a higher effect. I think that is what was troubling Governor Kohn. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. 
MR. STERN. Im sort of lost as to how this might work.  I thought you said earlier that the people in the marketplace anticipate that were going to buy more Treasuries than weve 
announced so far anyway. MR. FISHER. After the time frame is over or during the time frame, just for clarification? MS. MOSSER. They are expecting both an extension and an expansion. MR. STERN. Okay. So if we officially announce an expansion, are they simply going to mark everything up from here, or are they going to say, Thats what we expectedend of story? MS. MOSSER. That depends upon the size. The size theyre expecting now is smaller than what has been proposed in alternative A. MR. STERN. So if we do something bigger, presumably theyre going to say thats probably it. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. No, I dont think thats right.  I think doing it means that you like what youve done. You want to do more, and it opens the door for doing even more at subsequent meetings. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let me just say that, although we have to manage expectations, weve made a commitment to what weve made a commitment to, and with the federal funds rate, we have surprised markets, and if we have to surprise markets, well do it again. So there is no commitment to do anything other than what weve said.  We have the right, as we say explicitly in the statement, to adjust the timing.  We could, for example, phase out by 
extending the period but not the amount in order to go out more slowly.  There are other things we can do. So lets not jump the gun here.  But I do want to ask youjust because this came up earlierto think for the next meeting a bit about the idea of whether shorter maturity MBS would have benefits because it would, in addition, have some exit benefits. MS. MOSSER. Yes, and we are going to study purchasing ARMs, which we had not purchased. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not just ARMs but also seasoned MBS with shorter duration. MS. MOSSER. Yes. I dont want to leave the impression that were not buying any seasoned MBS.  We are.  In fact, the purchases that were making in the dollar roll market are actually exclusively the higher coupons because thats where the liquidity in the market was most affected. So from a balance sheet, month-to-month perspective, we actually are purchasing them.  Were simply then rolling those purchases for the following month and lending them out, if you like, through the financing market.  But we could definitely investigate increasing the share of higher coupon MBS as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were there other two-handers?  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Well, Im at a loss to understand how to interpret the markets expectation. You talk to people in the markets quite a lot.  During that conversation, do they 
    understand this path better than everyone else?  I mean, we dont communicate this in our statement.  I guess the question is, If in our own commentaries we go out in public, would you be relatively indifferent toward our describing it?  We said we would do $300 billion, and I have interpreted this that, as we get closer to $300 billion, we would smooth this down and finish up.  That is how this reads. Its a $300 billion program.  But others in the market have an expectation that its going to go on to another $100 billion or something like that.  What is the right amount of information to communicate? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It says we will adjust our magnitude and timing according to the information as it comes in.  So we could expand the program, we could reduce it, or we 
could spread it out. All of those things are options.  I dont think its fundamentally different from other monetary policy decisions, which involve both communication and responding to new information that comes across the transom. Trish. MS. MOSSER. I dont think the communication challenge is any different than it is with discussing the swap lines or the 13(3) programs.  They all have deadlines. Markets participants understand that it is path dependent.  Their view is that, if the economy gets significantly worse, the probability that the Board of Governors will extend the 13(3) programs and that the FOMC will extend the swap lines and the purchase programs is much higher.  The better that things get, 
the less likely that is. MR. EVANS. That dependence suggests a change in the path other than what were currently expecting. So as I think about this, theres an outlook; theres an option chosen.  If the outlook stays the same, then weve said $300 billion, and it could be closed down, not just a recurrence. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, thats right.  A two-hander from the Vice Chairman. 
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think part of the confusion here is that we do a program and the market is also evaluating whether the program is effective, and then how are we going to react to the perception of the effectiveness of the program?  So if we do a program and the market responds in the way that we want the market to respond, the market participants are going to assume that, gee, it worked pretty well for the Federal Reserve, so of course the Federal Reserve is likely to want to do more of it.  Their view is conditioned not just on the macroeconomic outlook but also on how the markets respond to the program.  In this particular case of the Treasury securities, I think that the market expects that the program is going to be expanded because (1) we did expand the MBS purchase program and so theyve already seen 
that, when the market seems to get the desired response, the Fed has responded by increasing the 
size of the program and (2) theyve seen that the Treasury program seems to have worked in the desired way that we intended. So all of those things point to an expectation that they expect the program to be expanded. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But it also depends on the economic outlook. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Oh, sure. But its not just the economic outlook; its also how the program seems to work in practice because we dont have any track record on this. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. By emphasizing, as the Chairman just did, the ability to increase, slow down, extend, and so forth, it sounds to me like a very tactical approach.  The directives that come every six or seven weeks from the Committee, are they a mode of guidance to the Desk thats going to be enough for you to interpret how to make those adjustments, or are we talking about a more frequent consultation with the Committee in order to be able to respond tactically? 
  MS. MOSSER. From a tactical standpointand Im using the word tactical literally I think we have plenty of direction from the Committee.  We obviously need, particularly given how unusual and new these programs are, to communicate back to you to let you know what our tactics are, and weve tried to be clear with you. In fact, particularly in the case of the Treasury program, weve tried to be very clear with the market what our tactics are because transparency seems to make it more effective rather than less.  Now, if I can re-interpret your question just a bit, should either financial or macroeconomic conditions change dramatically, would we like to have more strategic instruction from the Committee? Yes, on a more frequent basis.  But barring that, I dont see that we need a lot more direction on the day-to-day tactics, which I think we tried to lay out for you in broad terms. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. The fact that the private sector has some expectation about what were going to do doesnt tell you anything.  Theyre always going to have an expectation about what we are going to do, even if were a completely silent Committee.  The point is that it is not optimal policy as weve come to understand it over the last 25 years.  You want to be in sync with the markets, and a lot of that is that the measure of success is not announcement effects.  If you say that youre going to buy a new category of assets that you have not talked about before, youre going to surprise the market.  Youre going to get some effect on that day.  It might have nothing to do with optimal policy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Lets go back to our regularly scheduled program.  [Laughter] President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im comfortable with continuing on the path that we laid out at the last meetingexpanding our balance sheet.  We did pretty well against 
 objectives over the intermeeting period.  Asset purchases added $215 billion, and the net runoffs in other lending, the reduction in the Treasurys general account, and some other miscellaneous wiggles in our balance sheet meant that currency plus reserves increased by $146 billion, virtually all of that in reserves.  So Im happy with how we did over the last intermeeting period. This last discussion has been fascinating against the backdrop of our not having a clear sense of exactly why and how expanding our balance sheet affects the world.  I think about all the experience weve had with tracing the course of the fed funds rate through a recovery and out again, and I look at the graphs of our balance sheet and the timing of the recession, and Im thinking, Why should our balance sheet peak in December or whenever it does? Do we have an analytical sense that thats the right timing for the magnitude of the stimulus? Are there announcement effects?  Maybe it doesnt matter.  Maybe its just the time path cumulatively summed. But this habitat theory doesnt say that there are announcement effects; Im not sure you get any announcement effects in that.  And is it the assets or the liabilities? Is it the base? I think were really groping in the dark here.  I think we need to recognize that. Id like to see the Desk pay some attention to the base and accelerate its pace of purchases a little if the credit programs are running off faster than we seek.  Similarly, if the credit programs dont run off as fast as we think, maybe the Desk could lighten the pace and respond accordingly. I think its going to be really hard to think about adjusting this over the year. As I said yesterday, its not likely to happen next week, for sure, but what if banks demand for liquidity, protection against adverse market events, falls or rises? That could shift the effect of what were doing. It could shift us toward a much more stimulative effect or a much less stimulative effect pretty suddenly, and I think we need to be alert for that. 
   As for the statement, something B-ish would be good for me.  [Laughter] I guess I like the general structure of B, as its being called hereits simple.  But I could go with any of them. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im in favor of the action and language of alternative B with no primes.  I think we dont need to take additional action today.  We need to get further along in implementing what weve done.  With a less negative outlook, I think the need for an additional, immediate reaction is less pressing and, given the high level of uncertainty, it argues for being a little more gradual in our actions. Having said all that, I agree with many of the points that President Yellen made.  The outcomes we predicted are just not satisfactory from the perspective of the objectives that the Congress has given us. The lowest unemployment rate we have in 2011 is 6 percent.  Now, I think the NAIRU may have risen in the structural changes, but whether it has risen 2 full percentage points, I think even President Plosserlet the transcript show that President Plosser shook his head no. [Laughter] So even at the end of 2011, we have an output gap.  We can discuss how big it might be, but something is there.  And inflation in most of our forecastsnot all of them, but most of themis still on its way down.  So this is not a satisfactory outcome, and we need to think carefully about what we can do about it, consistent with what the Congress has told us to do as the objectives of monetary policy. There are a number of potential things we could do.  One is more purchases of long-term securities, as President Yellen suggested.  Im not comfortable at this point with the suggestion that President Rosengren was making yesterdaythat we set a long-term interest rate and aim for that. I think that would complicate the exit strategy tremendously.  But my mind is open to 
  these things. Id like to hear further arguments on this, and if the situation does fail to improve, I think we ought to be open to all those alternatives.  As I said yesterday, I would consider lowering the rate on excess reserves.  Its not a big deal, but it moves in the right direction at some point.  And were talking about possibly being more explicit on two kinds of paths.  One is the path for future purchases, and the other would be the path for the federal funds rate.  So President Bullard is right. Optimal policy kinds of discussions say that you ought to tell people what youre going to do in the future.  The Canadians have now moved to that.  I dont think the uncertainty about the future path of purchases is any different qualitatively from the uncertainty about the future interest rates.  So if were going to start specifying the future path of purchases, we need to think about whether we should also be specifying future interest rates. The Committee has had trouble with doing that because of the sense of commitment, but it needs a thorough discussion before we go down that path. I also have an issue with the cliff effect.  I, too, thought that the major effect came from reducing the stock of debt in the hands of the private sector, not necessarily the pace at which we do it. I can imagine that the pace matters some, but its mostly a stock thing.  I dont know how important the cliff effect is. How do we know when weve done enough?  Its going to be really hard, and as President Lacker said, we are in territory that weve not been in before.  We dont know what the metrics are.  Were just going to have to factor everything through the forecast, discuss where the path of financial conditions is going and what the implications for the forecast are, and decide when we need to tighten. It isnt going to be easy.  It never is. I hope that President Plosser is right and we come to that decision sooner rather than later.  But my expectation right now, 
 looking at the projections that we submitted today, is that we are not going to be there any time soon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Just to clarify the unemployment rate discussion, Governor Kohn, I think the difference in the language that you and I would use on this particular issue has to do with the fact that, even at 6 percent unemployment, which was my forecast for the outyears, is above what I would consider the steady state.  But that does not necessarily mean that monetary 
policy has some ability either to speed up that convergence or to alter it, and thats the difference between the models and the assumptions that were talking about.  Thats the distinction. MR. KOHN. Thank you. 
MR. LACKER. And this is related.  Governor Kohn, you described the forecast as unsatisfactory with respect to our mandated objectives.  Is it unsatisfactory because a preferable outcome is feasible or because the feasible outcomes make us really unhappy? MR. KOHN. I think we could move.  There are actions we can take to move us toward preferable outcomes.  I agree that monetary policy at the zero bound is really difficult, and were not quite sure what the outcomes are for the levers we push.  Were never sure when we push the federal funds rate lever, what the outcome is going to be.  But I havent given up on the possibility that monetary policy, even at the zero bound, can favorably affect the outcomes and get us closer to our legislative objectives. That is basically what weve been trying to do since December, and I think more of the same and maybe some innovations along several lines might be helpful. But, no, I think there are feasible actions we could take that would at least move us in the right direction. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
  MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I was saying yesterday on the economic outlook, my judgment is just that were going to have to see more data at this point.  As many people around the table noted, turning points are notoriously hard to predict.  And when the economy is down, as Governor Tarullo and others noted, it is vulnerable to further shocks, which might come from directions that are not contemplated right now.  Im also probably more pessimistic about financial markets than most here.  I think they probably have not improved all that much, and I guess I would not put too much weight on stock price movements.  These are the guys that brought us the tech bubble, remember? They just fluctuate way too much to take them as much of a signal in the short term.  So I think the basic mode for this meeting is that we probably need more information.  As many people, including President Pianalto and others, emphasized, wed like to see how these stress tests come out.  This is a big near-term issue for the Fed, and wed like to see what happens there. A critical issue for this Committee is how the Fed bills are going to go and how they are going to move through the Congress, as the Chairman was talking about yesterday.  Id also like to hear more about interest on reserves and related issuespossible sterilization techniquesto be discussed at the June meeting.  That may change the framework of discussion around here dramatically if we can think about those things and make more progress on those issues. On policy, we were very aggressive last timeappropriately so, I think.  Part of the argument around the table was that it was a timing issue with respect to housing and mortgage markets.  I agree with Governor Kohn.  Wed like to learn more about the effects of those actions as we go through the spring here. Any further commitments that we would make on asset purchases at this point would seem to apply mostly to a date in the futuresay, the October 
December time frame.  To me it seems unclear why we would make that commitment based on 
the information we have today.  We could make that commitment at a future meeting when we have better information on how the economy is progressing.  Also, alternative A, as Ive been arguing, does something I havent likedit contains what seem to me to be arbitrary round numbers of asset purchases.  I do agree with President Yellen that outcomes are certainly bad; and the fact is, as the Chairman was noting, in SeptemberOctober this economy experienced a very large, very real shock, and the economy is going to have to adjust to that shock.  Optimal policy can mitigate and help that adjustment, but it cannot offset it completely.  So our job is to figure out how much and what is the optimal path that we can calculate that will help as much as we can help.  But I think there are probably limits to what monetary policy can do in the face of a very large and global shock. Of the many B alternatives, I like B, but Im willing to entertain the discussion around the table here. A lot of good ideas are being mentioned here on this.  So as I said before, I would like to see policy expressed as a state-contingent rule to the extent possible.  What we should have in our heads is a Taylor-type rule for asset purchases.  In a Taylor-type rule you do not say what you are going to do with the funds rate in the future.  You say, Heres the rule; heres how we react to developments in the economy.  Everyone understands this, this informs the entire equilibrium, and thats how the equilibrium works.  We could maybe do the same kind of thing for asset purchases and say that this is how we are going to react to incoming events and on 
inflation, the output gap, and maybe other variables that we think are important, and that will inform the entire equilibrium and this is how we go forward.  Inside models, that is actually the 
optimal way to proceed.  I would like to try to getand we have been doing a lot, and the staff has done a lot, which I appreciatemore in that direction in a difficult environment when we have a lot of challenges in front of us. So that would be one way to implement what I would 
  interpret as the key lesson from optimal monetary policy in the past 20 or 25 years in academic circles, as President Plosser and others have talked about. I like the emphasis that the Committee has adopted in a lot of the discussion here that were concerned mainly about the persistent components of balance sheet expansionagency MBS, Treasuries, and agency debtand that it is the key issue going forward.  I like thinking of those as one group, which some of the staff memos didits a great way to think about it.  I also have the idea that I floated a bit yesterday that, for the more temporary programsthe liquidity programsto price them all as backstops just a little outside what would make all the volumes fall to zero. Those programs would stay in place, but then they would all get off the balance sheet, and you would not be clouding up your balance sheet with these temporary liquidity programs.  They would still be there as a backstop; and if financial turmoil intensified, theyd be there to be used. But youd have the idea that these things are used in time increments of weeks, not months or years.  I think we should think about that, but maybe Im the only one who thinks that we should. The temporary expansion of the balance sheet or the monetary base or asset purchases even over many months is unlikely to have a meaningful effect on inflation in the medium term.  We know that the effect of any policy depends importantly on the private-sector expectations of that policythat is, on the whole policy path.  If we do not define a policy path, the market will form expectations anyway and define a path for us, and so I think we should be clear in our own heads about what we are trying to do, what we think the optimal policy path looks like, and why.  Its a state-contingent path.  As I stressed yesterday, surprise announcements are not a characteristic of optimal policy as I understand it.  Good policy is a state-contingent plan that is 
well understood by the private sector. Most announcement effects tend to go away and might mislead us on what the impact of policy really is. So I think the bottom line is that we should stand pat for today.  We should get more information on the economy, on the stress tests, on the Fed bills possibility, and on other sterilization techniques. Id also like to look into the backstop pricing for liquidity programs.  Ill stop there. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just for clarity, backstop pricing is part of our thinking on exit that well be talking about, Brian? Yes. President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had hoped that the actions taken at the last meeting would have had a larger impact on long-term rates, particularly the 30-year fixed mortgage rate. Our rates may fall further as the backlogs at mortgage brokers subside.  Id like to encourage the Desk to consider what additional institutional feature might facilitate pushing mortgage rates down further faster using markets in which we dont have much experience.  As Trish highlighted in yesterdays discussion, there are a number of things that we dont directly affect, but we may be able to affect them indirectly.  In fact, that may be more efficient than increasing purchasesto think about some of those institutional features and whether we can 
help adjust them. In terms of the policy options, I prefer alternative B.  Id like to understand better the effect of existing programs before deciding what additional actions are necessary.  If our mortgage-backed-security purchase program is successful in significantly lowering mortgage rates, that may have the stimulative effect we desire.  However, even if that program is successful, the Bluebook simulations as well as those done by my staff make it clear that the 
optimal policy simulation would indicate that further actions are necessary.  Like President 
  Yellens, my forecast remains far from the goal for either inflation or unemployment.  So the question for me is, What is the most effective way to try to get closer to achieving those goals? Its not clear to me right now what the most effective use of our balance sheet is if the goal is to reduce borrowing costs to consumers and businesses.  Im a little uncertain whether thats through more large Treasury purchases, whether thats more actions in the TALF, or whether thats doing something different in the mortgage market.  Thinking that through might be more useful than expanding our balance sheet further at this time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, Im going to argue for alternative B, with only two minor editorial suggestions. But first I want to turn to the papers and suggestions of Presidents Plosser and Bullard and append what President Rosengren just said.  I do think that Presidents Plosser 
and Bullard have identified a real weakness in our current formulation of communication of monetary policy, but I would respectfully submit that they failed to identify the solution. What the public had before when we operated in simpler times and is now missing seems to me to be a sense of how we will adjust policy in response to shocks of various kinds.  With the 
transmission of monetary policy to the real economy disrupted by the disarray in financial markets, the funds rate up against the zero bound, and our taking policy in new directions, I sense that the publicwhether its the public here, in China, or anywhere else that has invested in our marketsis still confused about what has been driving our decisions and what our next moves are likely to be, conditional on the evolution of the economy.  The sense of confusion 
isnt so bad for our liquidity programs, as was implied by Presidents Plosser and Bullard.  It has often been noted that these are a natural extension of our discount window function, and I think thats understandable. They are demand driven.  Theyll tend to unwind themselves as financial 
   conditions improve or normalize.  But things get messy with our purchase of mortgage-backed securities and especially our purchase of longer-term Treasuries.  I think that there is still a lack of clarity in understanding our intent here. Now, maybe its just that Im the only one who doesnt understand the clarity. I may be the only one confused, but I dont think thats the case.  For example, what should the public expect?  Should the public expect that the purchases of MBS will continue until the residential construction situation bottoms out, until home prices bottom out, until foreclosures stop rising, or until one or another of these economic variables actually turns around and starts moving in the other direction?  Or should the public be told to 
expect that the purchases will continue until spreads between mortgage rates and Treasuries rates normalize? Vice Chairman Dudley just now raised the issue of how we want the market to respond.  Well, with regard to large-scale purchases of longer-term Treasuries, the hope apparently is that they will put some downward pressure on long-term private rates.  Thats the way weve stated what weve inferred. But how do we judge whether our efforts have been helpful, given that many other factors affect the rates we hope to influence?  What interest rate spread are we supposed to be looking at?  In this case, thats not clear to me.  Do we just keep doing more and more until theres some unmistakable evidence that a recovery is under way?  Again, I respect very much what Presidents Plosser and Bullard have put on the table, but it doesnt say very much to resolve the questions and the uncertainty that Ive just raised.  It is not clear to me what difference it will make whether we say our intention is to buy X billion by the end of the year or to purchase X billion per month or to increase our holdings at Y percent annual interest rate. The lesson of history is that its extraordinarily dangerous for a central bank to target any measure of real activity in setting its policy.  So we certainly ought not to say that were going to 
   pursue action A until home sales rebound, for example.  It has also been proven dangerous for central banks to try to target longer-term interest rates.  At least thats my reading of history.  As Milton Friedman pointed out a long time ago, such attempts can all too easily lead to inflation or deflationary consequences. So that leaves spreads and/or a price and/or a price times a quantity and nominal values as an intermediate target.  For MBS, as noted above, a spread might make sense, but what about longer-term Treasuries?  Its not clear to me.  And the Reifschneider Roberts memo makes abundantly clear how little we understand the links between Fed purchases of longer-term Treasuries and inflation.  We still need a good deal of clarity in our ability to state our exit strategy, and I know were going to be talking about that later. For the time being, given the questions I have, despite the good efforts of the Presidents from Philadelphia and St. Louis, I would strongly argue for alternative B.  I think it would confuse the markets if we took the course outlined in alternative A.  One thing that was pretty clear around the table yesterday, I counted eight people who mentioned the fact that, every time we go out to speak, people are worried about the long-term inflationary consequences of what were doing with our balance sheetagain, whether its in Beijing or someplace in Minnesota, because I remember Gary mentioned it as well.  If we were at the point to expand our purchase of Treasuries, I think it would confirm suspicions that were just hell-bent on monetizing government deficits.  That is not our intention, but I think it would confirm those who have such suspicions.  Second, I dont think its necessary.  Were only partially way through the program that were trying to execute and weve agreed to execute now through autumn, previously over a period of six months.  So weve changed that wording slightly.  I think it would be a mistake, Mr. Chairman, despite sensitivity to President Yellens arguments, to argue for alternative A. 
With regard to two minor editorial suggestions, first, Brian, I appreciate the changes that were made.  But just to be accurate and given what weve been hearing, I would add and staffing to the end of the sentence that begins, Weak sales prospects.  Weak sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining credit have led businesses to cut back on inventories, fixed investment, and staffing.  Indeed, that is what theyve been doing.  Then with regard to President Plossers concernand I think the concern of all of usabout anchoring inflation expectations and anchoring inflation, we could accomplish that by appending to the end of the very last sentence of that first paragraph, because were talking about our policy actions, will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth without sacrificing the Committees long-term commitment to price stability. (A) Thats true. (B) It would provide comfort to those who wonder if we are sacrificing our long-term commitment to price stability.  The operative words in that sentence are that we continue to anticipate that our policy actions will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth.  I would add without sacrificing our longstanding commitment to price stability.  That would address the concerns that I heard from many, many people, and I think, President Plosser, that would address your concern as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At our last meeting, I favored the large-scale asset purchase option that was offered to the Committee.  In fact, I asked for a little more.  The reason was that I thought that we should get to the most appropriate policy and provide the support to the economy and the outlook so that we could plausibly stand pat if the outlook stabilized. I thought we should get to the best feasible outcome that we could support, and so at that time I understood $300 billion to be $300 billion unless the outlook or the markets changed 
 or something like that.  Coming in, I thought that our action in March was close enough.  We also have the TALF expanding and other support.  With those actions, I thought that this pushed the burden for future policy actions to be based upon something in the outlook that was not currently anticipated, and in fact, I think the current Greenbook outlook is pretty stable.  It has improved a bit and is consistent with this view. So I favor alternative B, which I interpret as no change in our policy. If we decided that we thought we could do more to improve the outcome and we wanted to do more, I think that we 
should find the right level as quickly as possible today on the basis of what we know so that we 
can stand pat. I worry that meandering policy is not confidence inspiring.  When we trigger a policy action, it should be on the basis of something we have learned about how the economy is evolving differently than we thought or there is actually news that normally would be interpreted as requiring that type of action.  I am just concerned about how the public is going to gauge our policy changes in this most complicated environment. Lastly, I do think there is a difference between our large-scale asset purchases as a policy instrument and our funds rate changes.  It is not just future expectations of the fed funds rate.  With the funds rate action, when we could do that, we could do it today or tomorrow.  Markets 
understood that to be implemented by the Desk, and we were in that environment.  Markets had more experience with that, and so they knew how to form expectations about policy, our response function. Now its more difficult when its unclear and there are reasons that its unclear. We dont always agree exactly on how the transmission mechanism works in general and especially now. But with large-scale asset purchases, it takes up to six months for the action to be implemented because it takes place over a period of time.  We ourselves dont really have good expectations of how those programs might change, and the public is even more challenged 
 in that way. The faster that we can get to the position that we think is best to support the best outcome that is feasible, the better off we are.  So I think that alternative B at the moment is the right choice. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  Ill ask President Pianalto to go ahead, but then maybe we can take a coffee break.  How about that? Go ahead. MS. PIANALTO. Ill be brief. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the high degree of uncertainty about the outlook and the uncertainty around how to size the quantity and composition of our asset purchases, I think the best course of action today is not to add any more uncertainty to this environment.  I hope that our meeting in June will be helpful in reducing some of the uncertainty around our asset purchase program.  So today I prefer making only minor changes to our statement, and I support alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Very efficient. Thank you. Why dont we take a 20-minute coffee break. Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Why dont we recommence.  President Lockhart, whenever you are ready. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is a challenge to be as succinct as President Pianalto.  B. [Laughter] Actually, I am a little bit ambivalent, quite frankly, coming into this decision. As I said yesterday, I think that the economy is in an ambiguous state and there is a lot of uncertainty.  I have sympathy for the arguments that President Yellen made that alternative A could actually tip the balance to better outcomes and improve on the forecast, which really isnt acceptable over the longer term.  A negative, which President Fisher mentioned, is the likelihood that alternative A would be interpreted as closer to deliberate 
 monetization. So, as I said, I am supporting alternative B, and I favor adopting the language that helps establish a clearer understanding of policy conditionality over time. I thank Presidents Plosser and Bullard for all their efforts because I think they drove that point home very strongly.  So I strongly support the alternative B language that says that the Committee is prepared to make further adjustments in timing and overall amounts as appropriate, in view of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The full impact of Marchs policy decision on real economic activity hasnt yet been realized, and there is fiscal stimulus in train that is yet to be fully reflected.  So as many others have stated, I would like to wait and see how the financial and economic environment evolves.  That is it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. 
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, on the consideration of A versus B, I prefer B for several reasons, which I will try to summarize quickly.  First of all, I do think the economic outlook has improved a bit.  Maybe it will turn out to be a false dawn, but maybe it will continue to improve.  We will just have to see how that goes.  More important, I think that policy has already done a lot, if you take a broad range of things that we have been engaged in and have introduced since the fall of 07. That is not to say that we cant or shouldnt do more, if appropriate, but I think we need to bear in mind that we have been aggressive and reasonably timely, certainly over the last year or more.  And I am not sure that there is all that much more we can do with regard to the outcomes associated with the dual mandate between now and the end of 2011two and a half years. I am just not persuaded that a lot more activity on our part is going to have a major effect on how those numbers are going to look over that time frame. 
 I also am a little concerned, or I wonder, whether we would continue to get a lot of bang from increased asset purchases along the lines that we seem to think we have had so far.  This cant be a free lunch. At some point, there have to be both a diminishing response in the market and increasing risks of adverse consequences for inflation or other things going forward.  I think we need to bear that in mind, if and when we decide that we want to scale these things up even further. So for those reasons, at this time, I favor alternative B.  As far as language is concerned, I would be equally happy with B or B. I think either of those is fine, and I do think that tying our policy more explicitly to our inflation objective, along the lines that President Fisher or President Plosser suggested, would be constructive for the reasons they suggested.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a quick intervention.  First, I was extremely uncomfortable with the Treasury purchases when we last met.  I continue to be extremely uncomfortable with them.  I wont relitigate that here for the reasons I articulated last time; plus, I dont like losing.  I dont want to lose again.  [Laughter] So as Sun Tzu said, I will step back from that.  It is no surprise, then, that I oppose an increase in our Treasury purchases beyond what we did last time.  In terms of the discussion about markets and their expectations that we had earlier in this round, Mr. Chairman, I think we should not be surprised that markets want more; and the more we give, the more they will want.  Having a strong, large, and credible buyer of Treasury securities is all to the good for a Treasury desk, and so I dont think we should be surprised by that at all. With that large caveat, I favor alternative B.  I think that we should be patient. I think we should be the adults in town.  We should favor as much policy certainty as we 
 possibly can have. We have an opportunity here not to be lurchy, not to be jumpy, and I think alternative B captures that. I have one other area of discomfort with alternative B that I would raise.  In paragraph 3, Mr. Chairman, after we denote in detail the numbers of our purchases, which really are just a restatement of what we did previously, we then go on to say, The Committee stands ready to adjust the timing and overall amounts of its purchases . . . in view of the evolving economic outlook. I think that the markets are unlikely to view that language neutrally.  The sentence is new from what we said in March, and it looks to me as though, when last time we said that we stood ready to do something, we were standing ready to buy Treasuries if circumstances evolved, which we ultimately did.  I view that as being quite forward leaning.  In fact, it probably does match market expectations, which Trish rightly described.  But it tends to pre-judge that outcome.  At least if I am properly hearing our colleagues around the table, it is not a judgment that we want to make.  And I continue to think that the last sentence in paragraph 3where we say, The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and compositioncertainly gives us that flexibility. That is the same sentence that we used in March, which gave us that flexibility. So I must say that I dont really understand the rationale for including this new sentence about standing ready, particularly the reference to overall amounts of those purchases, until we have gone much further.  So that is a particular area of discomfort on alternative B. Finally, in the debate that is brewing about the limits of monetary policy in this cycle, I think I would associate myself with President Stern and suggest that we have accomplished much. On balance, what we have done over these past 18 months has been remarkable.  If the 
next 18 months force the same kind of innovation and creativity by the Federal Reserve, we can almost guarantee that those projections we have submitted here in April arent coming to pass.  
 So this might be a proper time for us to be a bit more patient and to be a bit more hesitant to continue to push the envelope, and we will see whether or not the projections come to pass.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE. Thank you. I am going to support alternative B.  Although I agree with President Yellen that the forecast outcome is not desirable, I also agree with a number of others that I am not sure I understand right now the effectiveness of which programs.  We are also in a situation where we are dealing with numerous programs, some of which we control the size and others of which we do not control the size, particularly if we look at the TALF and the expectation of the TALF going anywhere from $100 billion to $1 trillion, depending on what the take-up is. Right now, as we add the CMBS and we put it out there at five-year terms, we are going to limit the five-year terms to $100 billion.  It is not clear whether we would get additional growth on the three-year terms, so I would rather wait and see how that works out. On the language, I think it is very difficult to come up with language that indicates a steady set of purchases for very different programs.  If you look at the lumpiness that Trish pointed out in the mortgage marketsbut even if you look at our statementsthe $300 billion purchases going to autumn versus the mortgage-backed securities going to the end of the year dont translate into even purchases from now until the end of the year.  The mix would change.  
So, for those reasons, I would prefer the language in alternative B. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe the problem with which we are confronted, as many of you have already noted, is fundamentally one of communication.  I would elaborate that a bit to say that I think the problem may be in no small part our ability to 
communicate to ourselves, individually and collectively, why we are doing what we are doing.  I regard that as important because of what I said yesterday and what the Chairman mentioned this morning in the conclusion to his wrap-up, which is that we may be faced with a suboptimally performing economy for some time to come in which the policy challenges will extend beyond the challenge of readjusting our balance sheet over a number of years.  Under these circumstances, it becomes more important that we have a clear sense of what policy instruments we think are available and why and how we are going to deploy them in response to a given set of conditions. Based on listening to the March meeting discussion and this meetings discussion, I do not feel that we are actually in a position to articulate a standard that is roughly comparable to what is articulated when normal monetary policy is being done.  Under those circumstances, I favor saying the least because my concern is that saying more will lead to inferences that we dont actually want people to draw. So, for example, by adopting a more forward-leaning strategy such as alternative A this morning, I fear that a message would be sent as to how exactly we are reading the green shoots versus the red herrings debate.  I fear that there would be an inference drawn that we have concluded that we know how the Treasury purchases are actually functioning and we have some reason to believe that they will respond to what we think the most important problems in the economy are.  Like Governor Warsh, I do fear a bit that an inference will be drawn as to our being more willing to accommodate the fiscal policies that are being 
pursued right now, which I think is not something that any of us has decided we want to 
communicate. This is not to say that I would be opposed to increased purchases of Treasuries or, indeed, any other number of policy instruments, but only once we are in a position to 
communicate with enough specificity, either in our statements or through other means of communication, so as to guard against those kinds of inferences being drawn. On the merits, I think that President Yellen stated the economic conditions better than I could, and I subscribe to her analysis. On the outcomes, I favor alternative B, and I should say I guess that I favor alternative B with as little change from the March policy statement as is possible, given that we are now in a later month, precisely to avoid any of the inferences that I suggested could be wrongly drawn being in fact drawn.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some sympathy with President Yellens case for expanded purchases, but I think that we have to recognize that these purchase programs have costs as well as benefits.  Speaking for myself, I would really feel more 
comfortable if we had a more formal evaluation of what those costs and benefits were regarding what we have done up to now. One cost that I dont think we have ruminated on very much is the interest rate risk that we are actually taking on the Feds portfolio.  One thing I have wondered about is, if the balance sheet were to get $6 trillion and most of that was Treasuries and MBS, what would happen if short-term rates rose above the yield on our portfolio?  What would happen if we were asking the Treasury to pay us money because we had negative interest?  In a way, we are turning ourselves into a kind of S&L in terms of our balance sheet structure, and we really need to think about what the implications of that are for the medium and longer term.  So I would encourage the staff to do analysis on those kinds of issues for the June meeting. The second reason that I dont think it is appropriate to do it right now is that it would send an odd signal to the market.  We are saying that things are better, yet we feel the need to 
 expand our purchase programs in a way in which the market was not anticipating us to do.  So I think it would be a little confusing to the market.  I think the market is expecting us to do something in June about Treasuries because of the cliff question.  In other words, what happened?  It is a six-month program.  The market is going to start looking ahead to what happens at the end. We need to do more to get clear on how we think about these cliff effects.  It is not quite the same as the federal funds rate because you could argue that ending the purchase program is de facto tightening.  You are taking away something that is pushing down rates, so I dont think it is quite the same as specifying the federal funds rate path.  It is a lot different, too, 
because there is so little experience with it.  We have had many, many economic cycles in which 
to get a sense of the federal funds rateyou know, market prices, futures expectations, et ceterabut I think we need to do some more work on this whole cliff effect.  I think the market implicitly assumes that we are going to taper off and smooth the rough edges.  I notice that, in 
the balance sheet simulations that were put forward yesterday, it went to the end and just ended abruptly. I dont think that is really what the market expectation is.  I think they expect us to round those off. But we havent really discussed that formally as a group, and we need to come to some conclusions on that. As far as the choices for the statement, I favor the B alternativesyou know, B, B, and B. I am not sure what is gained by the added details.  The market participants can already calculate the monthly purchase rates by just taking what we have announced about duration and magnitude.  I also think that writing down specific monthly purchase rates implies that the growth rate of the balance sheet is the prime metric driving our thought process.  I dont really think that is right. We are really thinking more about the effect on financial conditions.  And I dont think a dollar of Treasury purchases is necessarily the same as a dollar of agency purchases 
  or agency MBS or some other things that we are doing with our balance sheet.  So I dont want to suggest that a dollar of the balance sheet is created equal across all our different facilities.  Finally, if we added some more detail, it would be a little confusing to people because they would say, Well, why are they telling us this now?  Why didnt they tell us this a meeting ago, two meetings ago, or three meetings ago?  So I think it would be more confusing than illuminating to the markets.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. All right.  Well, I again have benefited from a good discussion. I think the policy discussionsdont take this the wrong wayare getting 
better. [Laughter] I think they are getting more informative and more interesting as we go along. And I do appreciate it. On the substance there is a good bit of consensusnot complete consensuson standing pat. We have seen a bit of improvement, but it is very tentative, and other factors, like the bank 
assessment program and fiscal policy, are in train.  So there is some benefit in watchful waiting for a time.  We have, of course, taken very strong actions in the last few meetings, including a December move to zero and the large asset purchases that we announced last time.  Also, before substantial increases in our balance sheet, I think many of uscertainly, Ifeel that we need to get further advanced in our understanding of the exit strategy and the tools we will have and what we will be doing as we go forward.  So understanding that more stimulus would be good, as suggested by the Taylor rule, for example, I think that it would be better to stand pat on the purchases this time. With respect to the statement, I appreciate very much the discussion on alternative B and so on. I think the consensus for the group was to stay with what we have.  The issue here is that we havent quite figured out how to express the state contingency.  If we had a Taylor rule 
  that would tie the monthly purchases to observables, as President Bullard was suggesting, I think that would be right and good. Unfortunately, the only way to establish such a rule is through a long period of experience, unless we are prepared to write it down, which I am not quite sure we are. Another issue related to that isthe analogy is not perfectwhether it is the flow of purchases or the stock of purchases that matters.  That is a question. Given our inability to write down a contemporaneous Taylor rule, another alternative approach that one might use in an interest rate context would be to specify a path and then to change that path as new information comes in.  That is part of the debate between instruments and target rules, for example. So as I said, I very much appreciate the insight and discussion of this issue, and I hope we will continue to make progress.  I would take some exception to the view that we are making up numbers entirely, because we have done our bestand the staff has certainly done its bestto try to assess the market and interest rate effects of these actions and feed them into the model.  Obviously, there is a lot of uncertainty, but being uncertain doesnt mean you do nothing.  It means you do the best you can, given the information that you have. On state contingency, Governor Warsh raised the concern about the new sentence, three from the bottom, that the Committee stands ready to adjust the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities.  Governor Warsh, is your concern that this signals that we are going to increase?  My thought about this was that it would in fact signal that we are being state-contingent and that this would be equally likely to induce us to decrease as to increase. MR. WARSH.  In light of our behavior and the language around our behavior historically, I think that markets would read this as going in one direction and the one direction is far more likely up.  Again, I think the overall amount certainly triggers it.  And I must say that I dont understand what that sentence does that isnt accomplished in the final sentence. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the way I thought the two sentences were different is that the first one speaks specifically to the securities purchases, which is the topic immediately before it, and it creates for us the flexibility to adjust the timing, for example, to taper off or, for that matter, to adjust the size of the program.  I view the last sentence as addressing the static overall size and also, when we say composition, as implying that we are looking at the mix of programs and so on as well as the securities purchases.  So that was the intent. Are others uncomfortable with that sentence?  President Lacker? MR. LACKER. I am, too.  I made the mistake, when I initially read it, of reading the plain language version as symmetrically contingent.  But I think Kevin is fairly persuasive that, in the context of our statement, it is likely to be read as pointing toward the possibility of expansion. Now, there are times in which the appropriate contingency ought to be asymmetric, but I dont think we intend to communicate that here. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Governor Warsh had a point about the words stands ready, which we did use before. Suppose we soften those words a little and say, The Committee will consider adjusting the timing and overall so that it sounds like something we will consider in the future rather than we are poised to do it. I dont know whether that would help, Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Yes, I do think that helps. MR. PLOSSER. How about just evaluate? 
MR. LACKER. May consider? Adjusting somewhat.  [Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Will considerwas that what you said? 
MR. KOHN. That is what I said, and President Plosser said will evaluatethe timing and overall amounts of its purchases. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. But get rid of as appropriate.  The Committee will evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases in view of the evolving economic outlook. MR. KOHN. Everything we do is appropriate.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. I think that is an improvement, but I still thinkand I regret not mentioning this myselfthat Governor Warsh makes a key point.  Given what Trish told us in terms of expectations, even though I dont like being driven because, as it was pointed out earlier, the markets and the dealers are never satisfied.  But even with softening language like that, it is new, and you are opening up the door.  I dont think you should put it in here. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Are there any defenders of that sentence? All right. Seeing noneyes? No? MR. PLOSSER. I kind of like it. [Laughter] MR. EVANS. I kind of like it, too. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I am prepared to strike it, if that is the will of the group. MR. HOENIG. I kind of like it as well, but I thought it gave us some flexibility to say, We wont go as far.  If this doesnt serve that purposeand I think I would defer to you, Kevin, on this, because I hope that conditions evolve so that we dont have to go to the total then I would back away. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I agree with Governor Warsh that the market thinks that the prospect of taking down the size of the facilities is extremely low. MR. HOENIG. Okay. So then I would strike it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Mr. Chairman, I liked your explanation that you thought you had two bases covered here. That is the way I read it.  I didnt read it the way Governor Warsh did. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I am going to propose a modification, and then we are going to take a straw vote.  Okay?  The modification is, The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchase of securities,get rid of as appropriatein light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  Is that an improvement, Governor Warsh? MR. WARSH.  Yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  So let me ask all participants, all 1 people, for a yes or noor feel free not to vote. [Laughter]  All right. So how many would like to retain that sentence as amended?  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.  Ten? Okay. Well, that is a majority then.  So the sentence will be changed to, The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving outlook and conditions in financial markets. As for the other suggestions that were made for paragraph 1, President Fisher made a suggestion close to this, and I was thinking how to respond to President Plossers concern about balancing our concerns about growth and price stability.  I am not quite sure that President Fishers suggestion of saying without sacrificing quite works because the causal factors in that last sentence in paragraph 1 include not only the Fed but also fiscal and monetary stimulus, market forces, and a whole variety of things.  What if we add to the end of alternative B, paragraph 1, the words in a context of price stability?  So it would say, The Committee 
   continues to anticipate that these various factors will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a context of price stability? MR. PLOSSER. My concern was that we wanted to link our policy actions that we believe are consistent with our objective of price stability.  Mr. Chairman, your suggestion doesnt link the two necessarily. It just places it in a context.  I am struggling a bit with what the right language might be. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But the first sentence of paragraph 3, though, says, Will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  So that links our tools. MR. PLOSSER. Okay. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is this last phrase helpful to you, President Fisher? MR. FISHER. I agree with your point because it does talk about fiscal and monetary stimulus.  I appreciate the fact that we at least make some reference to price stability, and I think that is the important point. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. If everybody is okay 
MR. PLOSSER. So you are going to add that sentence. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I am going to add the phrase at the very end of paragraph B1, the words, in a context of price stability.  All right.  The last thing that came up, President Fisher suggested in the third sentence of alternative B, Weak sales have led businesses to cut back on then, instead of inventories and fixed investment, have inventories, fixed investment, and staffing.  I think that is fine substantively.  The only thing I would note is that we do reference job losses in the previous sentence.  So does anyone have a view on that? I am happy to make the change.  All right. Shall we go ahead and make the change? Is that okay? 
  All right. So inventories, fixed investment, and staffing.  Do you have all of those changes now? Are there further comments? MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. The word somewhat in the first sentence just snags my brain. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We dont want that.  [Laughter] MR. LACKER. Somewhat is great the way we usually use ityou know, somewhat higher, somewhat lower.  That is a long and honored tradition in central banking.  [Laughter] But slowing somewhat CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. How about appears to be somewhat slower? 
MR. LACKER. That would be much more direct. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I guess that pace requires an adjectiveappears to be somewhat slower, the pace is slower.  Isnt that right? MR. LACKER. I am not a good enough writer to know why. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Isnt that right, Brian? Okay. The pace of contraction appears to be somewhat slower. MR. LACKER. Perfect. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any grammarians with concerns? You know, this is actually kind of fun here.  [Laughter] I have always enjoyed it.  Other comments? All right. Debbie, do you think you are able now to read the statement? MS. DANKER. I will give it a shot, and the eventual vote will be on both the alternative B directive from the BluebookI dont think it is affected by this language change and the statement that I am about to read.  Please correct me if I dont have it right. 
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the economy has continued to contract, though the pace of contraction appears to be somewhat slower.  Household spending has shown signs of stabilizing but remains constrained by ongoing job losses, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Weak sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining credit have led businesses to cut back on inventories, fixed investment, and staffing. Although the economic outlook has improved modestly since the March meeting, partly reflecting some easing of financial market conditions, economic activity is likely to remain weak for a time.  Nonetheless, the Committee continues to anticipate that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and market forces will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a context of price stability. In light of increasing economic slack here and abroad, the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued.  Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term. In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent and anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  As previously announced, to provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall 
conditions in private credit markets, the Federal Reserve will purchase a total of up to $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and up to $200 billion of agency debt by the end of the year. In addition, the Federal Reserve will buy up to $300 billion of Treasury securities by autumn.  The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts 
    of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The Federal Reserve is facilitating the extension of credit to households and businesses and supporting the functioning of financial markets through a range of liquidity programs.  The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and composition of the Federal Reserves balance sheet in light of financial and economic developments. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That is what I have as well. MS. DANKER.   Chairman Bernanke Yes   Vice Chairman Dudley Yes   Governor Duke Yes   President Evans Yes   Governor Kohn Yes   President Lacker Yes   President Lockhart Yes   Governor Tarullo Yes   Governor Warsh Yes   President Yellen  Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  We have a couple of other items hereone substantive item.  We have, as you know, a Transparency Committee, which has been 
very actively investigating all aspects of our programs, our institutional structure, and everything else to try to find whether there are opportunities to provide more information to the public about our activities that would not compromise our legitimate need for confidentiality of our policy 
objectives. I asked Governor Kohn to report to us briefly on progress in that committee. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin with a bit of a sidebar, which is that the work of the Transparency Committee of this group is to decide what should be public and what needs to be confidential. In that regard, I found an article in the Financial Times, in which somebody seemed to have seen a staff paper, to be troubling.  So I think we need to decide 
as a group what information gets out and what doesnt and preserve that confidentiality. 
   What weve been doing is considering a number of possible steps to improve transparency for our liquidity programs.  Weve been concentrating on the collateral side.  What can we say to reassure people that we are behaving in a responsible way and that we are not putting the publics money at risk?  We were embarked on this for a couple of weeks, but I would say that congressional pressure on this issue has stepped up.  Also in recent weeks we have had requests for detailed data on individual borrowers, and the budget resolution had two amendments related to us.  One was a DoddShelby amendment, which called on the transparency side for the reporting of the amount and nature of collateral in the liquidity facility; the extent of losses on the Maiden Lanes and other special purpose vehicles due to collateral revaluations; information on the number of borrowers under various programs, including measures of concentration; and then information on contracts that we have with private-sector firms involved in design, pricing, management, and accounting of the lending programs.  We are addressing all of those points, and I think our proposal, when it finally gets done, will satisfy the DoddShelby amendment.  In addition, Senator Sanders asked for the identity of firms receiving liquidity assistance and the value of the assistance each firm had gotten and what they were doing with the assistance.  We are less inclined to do that because our view is that it will undermine the effect of the program.  So we can come back.  I would be interested in the views of other members of the FOMC on that. We are preparing tables on the number of borrowers and the amounts of discount window borrowing by type of institution at the discount window for banks divided by banks (and maybe by size) and then thrifts as a separate linefor example; the number of borrowers and amounts borrowed under the other facilities, PDCF, TSLF, all of that sort of thing.  Trying to get some sense of the concentration and those things, like the top five borrowers, the top ten borrowers, 
what proportion of the total they account for, a table showing the percentage of the collateral pledge by depository institutions being used to secure loans by different types of institutions.  We do have a breakout of the types of collateral now, but we would break out things a bit further, particularly on the security side, where we will give the ratings of the securities that are used as collateral. And were working on this business of how much we spend on the private-sector firms. We published a lot of information about the Maiden Lanes and the commercial paper facility in the annual report that just came out a couple of weeks ago, and one thing were looking into is whether we could update that information quarterly.  So when the Maiden Lanes are marked to market on a quarterly basis, perhaps some of the additional information that appeared in the annual report could also be done on a quarterly basis.  It wouldnt be subject to the oversight of an outside auditor, but we could generate it in the same way we generate that. Now, as I said, weve discussed the congressional request about detailed information on individual borrowers, and we looked at different ways of cutting that.  So could we not do it for the discount window for banks but do it for the unusualthe 13(3)facilities? Could we not do it for the regular discount window but do it for any unusual facility, which might include the TAF? Could we do it for some facilities but not for others because of our concerns about stigma, 
particularly for the TALF, for example?  It just seemed impossible to cut this thing in a clean way that would satisfy the people who want information and wouldnt discourage the use of the facilities in such a way as to undermine the effectiveness in promoting financial stability.  But I would be very interested in other peoples views on this.  Another problem that we saw was that most people, especially banks and probably others, have used our facilities under the assumption that their names wouldnt be released to the public.  So going back and releasing those names 
 struck me as particularly problematic.  If we were going to release any names and we decided that was okay, I think I would advocate doing it prospectively and giving people warning.  Were aiming at getting something done that the Chairman can talk about in his JEC testimony next week. Is that right? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Tuesday. MR. KOHN. Next Tuesday. So at least have an outline of what were trying to dowe are getting close; weve been mocking up tablesand then get those tables out within the next week or two after your testimony, Mr. Chairman. Thats the summary of where we are.  One idea that the Chairman had was whether, instead of just adding all of this stuff to our web site, we could embody it in a report to the Congress on a monthly basis.  Our web site is sort of by function.  So theres a risk-management 
function, and then there are some other, different functions.  We could re-cut it so that it was by facility instead of by function. Under each facility we could talk about the risk-management characteristics, how we value the collateral marked to market, do the margins, and then give all 
the information on that.  That might be a more user-friendly way to present things to the 
Congress. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We have time now for questions and comments.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. If we elect not to reveal names, would these tables be constructed the way that the Census does it, where if there are fewer than n firms, where n is a number like CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Three. 
MR. KOHN. Right. I think the way that we have generally released data in the past, if there were three or fewer, we would consolidate that category with another category. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. I am concerned about the releasing of names and Dons point, that you cant renege on assumptions and promises made earlier.  Tactically, I dont know what youre planning to say next week, but I would rather be viewed as being forced to do this rather than suggesting it terms of releasing names prospectively going forward because one of the great 
concerns isweve seen this with the TALF and with the PPIP and everything elsethe rules keep changing. I dont want to be viewed as one of the agents of changing the rules in a way that upsets people who have banked on us to be a steady institution.  I would just suggest that we be 
very careful about that and think that through.  Now, the Congress has its prerogatives.  Im not sure we want to feed that one. I would rather almost be in a responsive mode. I am a little worried that, if we dont respond sufficiently, they could be extremely harsh, and maybeDon, you summarized an awful lot there.  We were talking about feeding the 
monsters of the market earlier.  Feeding the monsters of the Congress is also saying that you can never really satisfy them.  Im not calling them monsters for the record, but they have a voracious appetite. I would be really careful on this business of suggesting that we release names.  If were viewed as the one who suggested it, it might upset the people whom we serve and who are important to our ability to function.  So Id just ask you to consider that. The other obvious trapand I saw this on the visiting committee overseeing Harvards investment debaclewhenever you talk about what youre spending on something in the private 
sector, its always going to be too much.  So just get ready for that one because you cant satisfy 
people very easily on that. It is always too big a dollar amount.  But thats obvious. MR. STERN. But some of those fees are in the annual report, arent they? 
   MR. KOHN. I dont know. I dont think theyre aggregated.  I mean, they must be implicit in the expense categories, right?  But theyre not broken out by the fees that were paying for servicing these special facilities. MR. WARSH.  I think except for the audit fees. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Except for the audit fees. 
MR. LACKER. I thought they were for the Maiden Lanes. 
MR. STERN. Yes, I thought they were for the Maiden Lanes. MR. LACKER. Not individually, but for each Maiden Lane I thought there was an expense line. MR. KOHN. But weve hired outside helpright, Billfor a lot of the other facilities? MR. LACKER. Right, but thats varied. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Just to add to that, we should not release the individual names.  You will undo half of what you have tried to do so far. As open as we should be, we also have a 
responsibility to make sure this thing is managed in an orderly way, and if we release names, I think the stigma will be back in a flash and lots of issues around it.  So I agree with those 
comments. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern, did you have your opportunity? Yes. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. If the Congress wants to make us release names, we could insist that the names of Home Loan Bank borrowers also be released. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Dont get them started.  [Laughter] Other comments or questions for Don?  Well, we appreciate your taking this on in your voluminous spare time.  Its 
 very important.  Our approach, it was suggested, is to do as much as we reasonably can and then try to draw the line at that point. Thats how were going to try to approach this. I just have a few announcements, and then we will be free.  First, you have until tomorrow at 5:00 p.m. to submit your revisions, if you have any, to your projections.  Second, youll see an SDS transmission on your BlackBerry because we are putting up links to the 2003 transcriptsa very interesting set of transcripts of the FOMC meetingswhich will be released publicly on Friday. So they are confidential until Friday.  Finally, I know there are ongoing conversations about the stress test, the capital supervisory program, but we have already scheduled a video meeting on Friday for an update and how were going to manage things on Monday. That doesnt mean thats the only opportunity if you have particular banks that you are concerned about or you want to hear more about what is going on. Please dont hesitate to get in touch with us, but we thought Friday would be a good time to bring everybody up to date. Okay. Again, lunch will be available in about five minutes for those who can stay.  The next meeting will be on Tuesday and Wednesday, June 23 and 24, and the meeting is adjourned.  Thank you. END OF MEETING 
              
 
 
 
 Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 3, 2009 A joint conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held on Wednesday, June 3, 2009, at 2:30 p.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Mses. Cumming and Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Mr. Fisher, President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Luecke, Assistant SecretaryMr. Skidmore, Assistant SecretaryMs. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Tracy, Weinberg, and Wilcox, Associate Economists Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
      
   Ms. Liang, Messrs. Nelson and Reifschneider, Associate Directors, Divisions of Research and Statistics, Monetary Affairs, and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Perli, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Richards, Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Hinojosa and Mr. Williams, Records Management Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively Mr. Judd, Advisor to the President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Ms. Mosser, Messrs. Rasche, Rolnick, Schweitzer, and Sellon, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Cleveland, and Kansas City, respectively  Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
   Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on June 3, 2009CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We have seen in recent weeks some significant increases in Treasury yields and mortgage rates. MR. KOHN. Are you going to close the meeting? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I am sorry.  This is a joint FOMCBoard meeting.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Again, we have seen a significant rise in Treasury yields and mortgage rates, and the reason for having the meeting is just to have a bit of interaction, I hope informal, about whether any policy action is worthwhile at this stage, and whether it is or not, if we want to talk at all about how we communicate about this issue.  As usual in an FOMC meeting, we are going to have a presentation from the Desk and an economic outlook update from Dave Stockton.  Before doing that, we have one piece of business, which is to vote to approve the selection of Brian Sack as manager of the SOMA.  Many of you know Brian, I am sure.  He was here. He went off to work with Larry Meyer for a while.  Now we welcome him back to the Fed family.  May I have a motion? MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  All right. Seeing none, the motion is carried. Let me turn now to New York for a report on the Desk.  Brian started yesterday, so I guess we will leave him a little more slack and go to Trish Mosser.  Trish. MS. MOSSER. You are stuck with me for one more round.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In spite of the recent hiccupa pretty big hiccup actuallyin mortgage markets, financial market conditions have continued to improve for the most part in recent weeks.  Most credit spreads continue to narrow, the availability offunding for financial firms has improved while the cost of that funding continues to 
      fall, and the banks capital-raising efforts since the release of the stress test results have exceeded expectations.  Gains in both equity and commodity prices reflect a growing belief that global economic growth has stabilized, if not exactly turned the corner. In short, the perceived tail risk of a sustained free-fall in the economy, combined with another financial meltdown, has receded fairly significantly.  The 
improvement in risky asset markets has been accompanied by significant increases in 
government bond yields and steeper yield curves around the globe.  This, of course, includes Treasuries and has some implications for our purchase programs.  Similarly, the notable improvement in funding conditions is reflected in reduced use of Fed liquidity facilitiesand thats a good thingbut it affects our balance sheet. I will talk about our programs and our balance sheet in a few moments, but let me start first with what is mostly good news.  Since the April FOMC meeting, global equity markets are up 10 to 30 percent, led by particularly strong increases in emerging markets and stock prices of all types of financial firms.  The improvement in the global growth outlook and the portfolio reallocation toward riskier assets is reflected in the narrowing of credit spreads nearly everywherewith the largest declines in spreads occurring in the riskiest asset classes and the riskiest countries.  Not surprisingly, the dollar has weakened notably, but in an orderly way.  Its fallen about 8 percent on a trade-weighted basis since the April FOMC meeting.  Generally speaking, the dollar depreciation has been largest against currencies where equity performance has been the strongest and the credit-spread tightening has been the largest.  The one exception to this, which is a bit of a puzzle, is the euro, where the dollar is nearly 9 percent weaker since late April. Turning to the United States, corporate credit spreads have tightened nearly 125 basis points for investment-grade companies and 350 basis points for high-yield companies since late April.  In fact, corporate bond rates themselves have actually fallen despite the backup in Treasury yields.  The largest banks continue to raise capital and issue non-FDIC guaranteed debt at a fairly fast pace, and the ease with which this capital has been raised is notable.  Several of the issues have been significantly oversubscribed, and the relatively muted effect of what in many cases is very significant dilution reflects both better economic news and increased confidence in the long-term viability of the large banks. Similarly, the spreads on most securitized products continue to narrow.  Yesterdays TALF subscription supported $15 billion of asset-backed securities, $11 billion of which was financed in the TALF.  Thats 13 issues, and they covered 
nearly all the eligible asset classes.  Indicatives, which are quoted spreads on existing consumer ABS, have continued to tighten, and the spreads on actual transactions have 
narrowed more than anticipated. Compared with the May TALF, the June 
subscription spreads are anywhere from 15 to 30 basis points narrower.  For a little longer term comparison, a Ford auto loan securitization yesterday priced 130 basis points lower than a very similar issue in the inaugural March subscription of the 
TALF. Thinking ahead to exitand this may be too soonbut there were several non-TALF credit card securitizations in the last week or two that were sold at spreads 
   at or below 100 basis points. In other words, they were sold at prices that make their financing uneconomical in the TALF.  The notable exception to this trend is the commercial-mortgage-backed securities market, where spreads widened very sharply last week in response to a proposed change in ratings methodology by Standard & Poors. S&Ps changes, if implemented, could result in downgrades of nearly half of the most senior CMBS tranches eligible for legacy TALF.  (It would also place S&Ps ratings judgments very far from its peers.)  Prior to the S&P announcement, the CMBS spreads had narrowed steadily in response to the expansion of the TALF to new and then to legacy CMBS; but since the announcement, they have widened more than 100 basis points. All the factors I noted at the last briefing have continued to push Treasury yields higher. Less macro tail risk, an unwinding of last winters flight to quality investments, upward revisions to both current and future Treasury supply, and the U.S. Treasurys intentional shift of issuance out the yield curve have all contributed to an increase of nearly 65 basis points in the spread between two-year and ten-year Treasuries in recent weeks.  Its worth noting that the 2-year yield hasnt budgedall of the steepening is due to an increase in the 10-year yield.  The yield curve is exceptionally steep, even by the standards of past recessions.  Typically, the spread between the two-year and the ten-year yield steepens steadily throughout recessions and continues to steepen into the recovery.  The current spread is 270 basis points that is above the post-recession peaks in the last few recessions and certainly much higher than previous levels late in recessionary periods in the past.  In addition to the factors Ive noted, a minority of market participants have interpreted this steepness as evidence of significantly increased inflation risk, but that doesnt seem to us at the Desk to be the consensus view in markets.  Reduced risk of deflation and improved liquidity in the TIPS market are the most commonly cited explanations for the rise in long-dated breakeven rates. Ill repeat myself one more time by noting that the 
Treasury purchase program is not large enough to offset the factors that are increasing long-term yields.  We continue to purchase securities at a steady pace, with purchases concentrated in the 2-year to 10-year maturity range.  You wont be surprised that our operations continue to be met with very strong offers to sell securities to us. Turning finally to mortgage markets, until the middle of last week, the effect of both the MBS and the agency purchase programs had been to narrow spreads to 
more-normal levels in these markets and, in the case of MBS, to encourage the refinancing wave that began in March. However, there is a clear limit to how low the Desk could and should push MBS and agency yields relative to rising Treasury rates.  We dont wish to push spreads so low that we become the market.  This would not only be detrimental to market functioning but would also likely impair our ability to exit successfully when the time comes.  In the MBS market, we reached that limit last 
Tuesday, when the MBSTreasury spread was 130 basis points, about 10 basis points below where it had been at the time of the April FOMC meeting.  On Wednesday of last week, MBS yields jumped over 40 basis points, and the 10-year Treasury yield rose 20 basis points, with most of those increases occurring in just a couple of hours during the afternoon. The proximate cause of the jump in yields was convexity 
     hedging by mortgage servicers and originators as the primary mortgage rate rose above 5 percentthe level widely viewed as the trigger for households to refinance, or not refinance. But more fundamentally, the backup in MBS yields and mortgage rates was, frankly, inevitable given the steady rise in Treasury yields. As is typical in the MBS market, once mortgage rates rose far enough that refinancing became unattractive, mortgage extension risk caused a positive feedback loop to ensue. With slower expected refinancings, the duration of existing mortgages and their associated servicing rights increased, which prompted selling of long-duration assets (MBS, swaps, and Treasuries), which in turn pushed long-term rates even higher, which caused more duration extension, more selling, and even higher long-term rates.  You get the picture. By the end of Wednesday, it was clear that the spring refinancing wave that we had been experiencing was over.  The mortgage convexity vortexthats one of my favorite descriptive terms of thishas waxed and waned over the past week. There were large increases in rates on Wednesday and on Monday and modest declines in rates on other days.  Regardless of the daily pattern, there is no doubt that mortgage rates have moved to a higher level, and there is likely to be additional volatility in fixed-income markets in the near term. So what does this mean for the MBS purchase program?  Except for a single day last week, we have not significantly increased our pace of purchases, nor are we planning to. To do so, we believe, would only narrow MBSTreasury spreads to the point that other investors would leave the market.  Moreover, the supply of low-coupon MBS is likely to slow significantly in coming weeks, and so over time we will shift the composition of our purchases toward higher-coupon, more-seasoned mortgages. If the rise in long-term rates persistswhich it may if there continue to be macro improvements, large Treasury supply, and convexity hedgingthen the new supply of MBS is likely to fall to very low levels, at which point we will consider additional tactical changes to the MBS program.  We are already considering several ways to adjust both the MBS and the agency-debt purchase programs in such circumstances, and we will be reporting back to you with our findings and recommendations at the next meeting. Finally, as Brian and I noted in the memo last week, the balance sheet has not grown as quickly as we had forecasted just a few weeks ago.  Essentially, the improvement in private funding marketsevidenced by a 40 basis point decline in the three-month LIBOR ratehas accelerated the shrinkage in our liquidity facilities.  As of the end of May, the liquidity facilities were $255 billion smaller than we expected a few weeks agomainly because of very large declines in participation in the TAF, swap-financed foreign dollar operations, and the CPFF.  Figures from this 
weeks operations suggest that the use of our liquidity facilities will continue to shrink, although perhaps not quite as rapidly as in the last few weeks.  As a result, our near-term projections for the balance sheet and the monetary base have been revised down. We now expect the balance sheet to grow about 3 percent per month over the summer. We will provide more details on balance sheet projections in a couple of weeks. In the meantime, Im happy to take any questions. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, Trish.  And thank you for many good reports. Questions for Trish? Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you. Trish, you noted that foreign yields went up.  Compare the increase in foreign yields with the increase in U.S. yieldsI am trying to get a diagnosis here.  Also you said that there were upward revisions to expected Treasury supply in the last couple of weeks, and I wondered what was going on there.  You said that the Treasury said it was concentrating further out the yield curve, so there might be pressure out there.  But have there been upward revisions to budget deficit projectionsor why the increase in Treasury supply? I wasnt aware of anything. MS. MOSSER. This is actually over the whole last month, so it isnt just the last couple of weeks. It is really since the end of April.  The April tax receipts were substantially below even the Treasurys estimates, so that has added to supply; and they are revising up the deficit projections a bit. I should have been more precise and said that the Street continues to increase their projections of Treasury supply.  We know that Treasurys announcements on this are more discreet than that, but the analysts on the Street continue to increase their forecasts.  The Treasury is absolutely pursuing pushing its issuance out the yield curve.  It had shortened up quite substantially the weighted average maturity of the debt, and over the course of this year, it is going to be increasing the maturity of the Treasury debt pretty substantially. Back to your first question about foreign yields, the increase in 10-year yields in the United States is slightly larger than the increases, say, in Germany and Spain.  It is about 10 or 15 basis points larger than, say, in France and the United Kingdom.  Japan is much smaller, only about 15 basis points. But the ranges go from about 15 basis points to about 50 or 60.  The United States is toward the top, but there is no question that yields have gone up everywhere. 
    MR. KOHN. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Trish, I also want to add my appreciation for the good reports you have been giving, particularly from someone who likes to eat the stuff up, as you know that I do.  I wanted to ask yougoing back to Dons questionwe were talking about $2 trillion for the 
fiscal year, which gives another trillion or so to run in terms of net new debt issuance.  You mentioned that the Street estimates are going up.  What are they talking about? MS. MOSSER. There is a wide variety of estimates.  I would like to get the Treasury staff here at the Desk to report back to you with the details.  But everyones median number keeps getting revised up. I think the range is still between $1 trillion and something over $1 trillion. But the fact is that all of the increments to everyones forecast are positive numbers.  No one is revising things down. But we can get back to you with more details. MR. FISHER. How far are we now into the Treasury purchase program of $300 billion? MS. MOSSER. We are almost exactly on schedule, so we are at about $100 billion or maybe a little over $100 billion.  Did I do that right? Yes. MR. FISHER. Then, my last question is with regard to the TALF.  You said the magic words exit strategy when you were giving your monologue.  A general question: In your opinion, has the TALF been effective or marginal in alleviating some of these market pressures? Or has this just happened in conjunction with a general improvement in the marketplace? MS. MOSSER. We think the TALF has had an important role to play in the consumer ABS markets in allowing for price discovery.  When a market goes dormant for months on end, it is very difficult for investors and issuers to know what the right price is, particularly when the secondary markets are so illiquid that the prices being quoted there are just so exceptionally 
   outside historical experience. The advantage of the TALF providing some financing has been that there is price discovery.  Every time there is new issuance, that new issuance comes in just a little below the previous issuance, and the bid-asked spreads narrow just a bit.  So we think that has actually been its main benefit, frankly, because the sheer size is not huge.  It has been more like a kick-start mechanism for the rest of the market. MR. FISHER. Thank you. And thanks again for your reports. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Trish, can you talk a bit about the mortgage-backed security ARMs?  In particular, you mentioned that the Desk was going to look at the three-, five-, and seven-year ARMs. So given that the long end has moved up so much, is there anything you are thinking of doing with the mortgage ARMs? MS. MOSSER. Yes. As a matter of fact, that is one of the topics that we are planning to talk about at the end of the month at the in-person meeting.  We are going to discuss some of the near-term strategy issues with the purchase programs, including some of the changes that we could make.  And ARMs are one of the areas that we, along with the New York and Board staff, are studying.  We will have probably a note for you and, if not a note, certainly a presentation on that topic. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto. 
MS. PIANALTO. Trish, in your report you mentioned the potential downgrade by S&P of some of the CMBS.  How is that going to affect our participation in that program? Is it going to reduce the number of CMBS that are going to be available for the TALF, and does that change any of our plans for that program? 
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I talked to the senior people from S&P this morning about this issue. What is happening is that they are changing their methodology, so the actual credit quality of the CMBS tranches that we are talking about isnt changing; it is really that they are changing how they characterize them.  And we are going to have to make a decision, frankly.  If their characterization is way outside what we think is appropriate, we may want to modify our criteria. For example, lets imagine a situation in which there are five rating agencies, and four rank a given tranche triple-A, and S&P is the outlier.  If we really judge that the outlier is inappropriatein other words, that there isnt a lot of credit risk associated with that tranche we might want to change our criteria to allow one exception among the credit-rating agencies.  So that is something that we are going to have to evaluate.  We are going to have to see what they do and then (1) evaluate what that means for the size of the eligible market and (2) consider what it means, if we modified the criteria, in terms of what sort of credit risk we would be actually taking. So we are going to have to wait and see what they actually do in terms of what the impact is and then feed that into what is appropriate for the program.  But it is not a change in their perception of the actual underlying credit quality; it is how they are characterizing that credit quality because they are changing their methodology. MS. MOSSER. That is true. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I just want to say, to be clear, that we have not made any changes. We are maintaining the triple-A requirement.  So if we dont make changes, that would eliminate close to halfor something like thatof the eligible assets. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. My point is that I think we just want to make sure that we control our own destiny. It may be completely appropriate for S&P to do these downgrades, and we may feel completely comfortable with that.  We may want to rule out all of those 
tranches. I am just saying that it is possible that we may view them as such outliers in terms of their assessment of credit quality that we may not want to give full weight to it.  So you are absolutely correct:  We havent changed our policy, and we havent committed to changing our 
policy. But we might want to reevaluate that.   MS. MOSSER. One other notable difference is that with TALF 2.0 we have been fairly clear in the information we have released to the public that we are going to do much more credit analysis ourselves and we are going to hire a collateral evaluation agent to give us an 
independent, security-by-security evaluation of the quality of the collateral.  One of the reasons for that was, frankly, concern among the team working on the TALF that we might run into a situation like this, where there were potentially significant disagreements across the rating agencies, and we really do want to have more control of our destiny, as Bill calls it.  So no 
decisions at all have been made, and this is one of the things that the team is working on very actively. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Another whole issue about the question of credit rating is that, when you are talking about a new securitization selling at par, the ratings are comparable across different assets, but when you are talking about a legacy security, where the security might be selling at a very big discount to par, it is not really clear how that price and rating map into actual credit risk. In other words, if I could buy a double-A-rated CMBS that is selling at 5 cents on the dollar and then I am haircutting it on top of that, the risk I am taking is probably de minimis.  So it is very important to recognize that there is a whole second set of complications when you are talking about legacy securities because a lot of these securities are not selling at par. They are selling at deep discounts to par, so a lot of the risk is already embodied in that 
price. But the rating agencies dont think of it that way.  They are rating it as if it were an instrument trading at par, and the risk of taking actually any losses whatsoever on that.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Yes, a question for Bill Dudley.  Wouldnt the other rating agencies follow suit and then change their methodology eventually, so the idea of having just one outlier maybe isnt that realistic over a medium term?  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is certainly possible.  I think that, in our conversations with the different rating agencies, we have felt the least comfortable that S&P was up to snuff in how they rate the commercial mortgage products.  So you are absolutely right. Everyone could converge to S&Ps new standardor maybe not.  But at the end of the day, what we really have to think about is that this shouldnt be driven by one rating agency.  It should be driven by what we are trying to do with the program and what is an acceptable level of credit risk to us. Now, obviously, the acceptable level of credit risk to us is de minimis.  So I am not suggesting that we are going to be widening the program to take on a lot more risk, but I dont think we want to absolutely pre-commit ourselves to go wherever S&P drives the bus.  Thats all. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The staff will keep working on these issues, and we will see where that goes. Anyone else, questions for Trish? Not seeing anybody, I turn now to Dave Stockton for a brief update on the outlook. MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The bottom line is that the forecast has strengthened somewhat further since the April Greenbook.  The incoming data have been a little stronger than we were looking for, and there has been, on net, some continued improvement in the key factors conditioning our 
forecast. In the near term, the main qualitative features of the story that we have been telling for some time continue to receive support from the incoming data.  Consumption looks as though it has flattened out in the first half after declining very steeply late last year. Housing looks to be stabilizing.  Businesses are continuing to slash production and by enough to achieve some sizable liquidations of excess inventories. And we are still seeing capital spending decline at a pretty rapid clip.   
      There have been a few surprises in the data, and most of them have been to the upside. In the first quarter, with imports declining much more rapidly than exports, the contribution of net exports to GDP was larger than we had expected.  And in the second quarter, we have received somewhat stronger, or maybe I should say less weak, readings on housing, equipment spending, and nonresidential construction.  On that last factor, we received two months now of data on construction put in place that were much stronger than we had expected.  Those surprises have been concentrated in power generation and refinery construction.  We checked with the Census Bureau, and it stands by its data. But I think I can say with some confidence that we are not looking for refinery construction to be the engine of growth to propel us out of recession here.  So we are not really attaching much signal going forward to any of the strength in this nonresidential construction, where we still see the fundamentals as pretty terrible. As was the case at the April meeting, we are still not seeing any signs of appreciable improvement yet in labor markets.  And I would say that the readings on the labor market, if anything, have been a bit worse than we were anticipating.  Initial claims have flattened out some in recent weeks, but at very high levels.  And insured unemployment has continued to soar.  In fact, those data led us to mark down further our near-term labor forecast, and we are expecting this Fridays May employment report to show a drop in private payrolls of a bit more than 500,000.  I expect that that figure would be pretty close to the ADP estimate but would be 100,000 weaker than 
our forecast at the April meeting.  And given the increase in insured unemployment, we are also expecting the unemployment rate in May to increase to 9 percent, and that is about  percentage point higher than we had in our previous projection.  Putting together the spending data, what we see in the labor market, and what we know about production, we are now estimating that real GDP declined at an annual rate of about 5 percent in the first quarter and at about a 1 percent rate in the second quarter. Both of those figures are about  percentage point stronger than our April projection. It is still the case, looking further ahead, that we think that the contraction in activity that we have experienced in the first half is going to give way to, first, a 
stabilization and then a modest upturn in activity in the second half.  That is predicated on the expectation, which we are seeing supported in the data at this point, that final demands more broadly are going to be stabilizing in the second half, supported by fiscal stimulus and the easing that has occurred in financial conditions. And we continue to expect some lessening in the pace of inventory liquidation going 
forward as stocks move into better alignment with sales, and that ought to provide a boost to production as well in the second half. As I mentioned at the outset, the key factors conditioning the longer-term forecast have shown further improvement and would lead us to revise up the projection later this year and in 2010. Stock prices are about 10 percent higher than was anticipated at the time of our April forecast, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar is down 
    about 5 percent relative to our previous projection.  As for interest rates, the backup in mortgage interest rates certainly would hold back housing some, but the quantitative effect of that increase would be offset by the decline in corporate rates that we are seeing and the decline in the corporate cost of capital.  So on net, the higher stock market and the lower dollar would provide some significant impetus.  That is offset only a bit by the higher oil prices, which are more than $10 a barrel higher across the forecast period. In combination with the stronger incoming data for the first half, the net effect of these changes in the conditioning assumptions would add about  percentage point to the growth in GDP in both 2009 and 2010.  That would put us at about minus 1 percent this year and about plus 3 percent in 2010.  As for our projection for the unemployment rate, as I noted earlier, despite the stronger spending data, the labor market is looking weaker to us.  As a consequence, we now expect the unemployment rate to top out later this year at somewhat above 9 percent. But then given the stronger outlook for real GDP growth over the next year and a half, we project a larger decline in the unemployment rate from that higher level, so that we would probably have a forecast of an unemployment rate a bit below 9 percent by the end of 2010, in contrast to our April forecast, which had it ending at a bit above 9 percent. Our inflation projection will likely be revised up a bit.  The incoming data on core consumer prices have been somewhat higher than we expected, but almost all of that surprise has been tobacco price increases that we just do not expect to persist.  Still, we are working with higher energy prices and a lower dollar that is likely to put some upward pressure on import prices.  Those are going to combine to provide a small boost, all else being equal, to core prices in both 2009 and 2010 of about a tenth or so.  Obviously this year is going to get some further boost in terms of total PCE prices of about  percentage point from higher energy prices and a bit higher core prices.  I will be happy to take questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, David, for this intermeeting report.  Questions for Dave? Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. David, where would you put the unconstrained equilibrium federal funds rate today compared with, say, the April meeting and earlier in the year?  And roughly how much of that is driven just by the forecast turning out differently than we expected versus how much of that is due to the easing in financial conditions that weve seen? 
  MR. STOCKTON. Vice Chairman, we havent done that calculation yet.  Were just getting started. But we would be happy to do that and get it to the Committee as soon as we get a little better fix on tying down the forecast at this point.  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Dave, on the question of risks to your outlook, there has been a lot of discussion of commercial real estate.  Can you give some sense of how you would quantify any risk to the outlook associated with worse-than-expected problems in the commercial real estate sector? MR. STOCKTON. Luckily that sector is a small enough share of total GDP that, even with an appreciable error on our part to the downside, there would not be a whole lot of direct effect on GDP. Nevertheless, it is still the case that the fundamentals there look extremely soft, and aside from the power generation and refinery surprises that we have had, the rest of commercial real estate is coming pretty close to our expectations in the forecast.  It is easy to see how we could have a sharper decline there than we have built into the forecast.  But I do not think we would be looking at something that did more than affect the top-line GDP by a tenth or 
two, even if we were to see a more significant decline.  Now, whether or not there would be feedback effects through the financial system of a continued deterioration in commercial real estate and sharper price declines there, I think that would probably be the bigger concern.  And if I were more concerned about the downside risk to the outlook, I would look for effects probably coming through that channel rather than through the direct construction channel alone. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? Okay. Let me make just a couple of comments about the situation, and then well open it up for any questions or comments that 
participants may have.  Looking at the increase in yields, it is not an entirely benign development, obviously.  There is the undercurrent of huge deficits, and on a few specific days, like the day on which the United Kingdom got the warning, we saw a bad combination of movements:  a decline in the dollar, a rise in yields, and a fall in equity prices, which is sort of indicative of a flight from U.S. debt.  So a couple of days like that were somewhat worrisome. Having said that, my own viewand I will want to hear views of others and from the staffis that most of what we have seen since the FOMC meeting is the result of more-positive influences, notably, first, the better outlook, which has caused the term premium to increase or the yield curve to steepen, and second, the reversal in the flight to quality.  We are seeing the dollar decline and the yields rise at the same time that equity prices go up, which suggests a more positive interpretation of the development.  It is not clear what role inflation expectations are 
playing. It is certainly true that, mechanically, a significant part of the increase is tied to the increase in 5- to 10-year breakevens. But whether that is really a change in inflation expectations arising, say, from reduced fear of deflation or whether its just better operation and more liquidity in the TIPS market is not entirely clear.  But either one, I think, is not particularly worrisome because the breakevens now suggest a still well-controlled rate of inflation, pretty 
close to what our target would be.  So I guess my overall assessment is that, although we need to watch carefully in terms of the risks associated with flight from the dollar or flight from Treasuries, that this is mostly a benign development.  Based on that, if I were recommending at this point, I would not recommend any change in our policy.  To the extent that this increase in yields is being driven by a better outlook that is an endogenous part of the improvement of the economy, I think our best approach there would just be to wait and watch and see how things go. 
  I would also mention, as I did in my note to the Committee earlier, that I think that Junes meeting is going to be very informative.  We have presentations in June on a wide variety of aspects of our program, including the effects of large-scale asset purchases; as Trish mentioned, the tactics of making purchases; the exit strategy both from individual programs and from the balance sheet; and managing the balance sheet more broadly.  So I personally would think that we would want to wait and hear more about those issues, particularly the exit strategy, before making any changes in our programs. On communication, my suggestion would be, to the extent that you agree that this is primarily a benign development, that we communicate that we are comfortable, that we are taking a wait-and-see approach, and that we will just review as necessary our policies as the data come in.  That would be the summary of my own view at this point, but if others disagree or want to amplify, I certainly would be happy and interested to hear that.  So are there any questions or comments?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I did suggest that this be a formal FOMC meeting to you in conversation last Friday.  I did this for three reasons.  One, to make sure we would be able to elect Brian Sack as soon as possible.  Second, the staff noted that the change in the monetary base projections or the balance sheet or however you look at it was going to be substantially different from what they had told us they would expect, given our plans coming out of the last meeting.  And I think in light of our uncertainty about just how transmission mechanisms are working right now, a little consultation was warranted even if ones expectation coming into this might not be that recalibrating or recrafting our plans was warranted.  My own 
senseI agree with you, Mr. Chairmanis that we shouldnt alter our purchase programs right now. Maybe we view that as warranted at the next meeting, but I do not at this meeting want to 
suggest that we ought to change our purchase programs, even though the trajectory for the balance sheet seems significantly lower.  The third reason I wanted to suggest that this would be a fruitful discussion had to do with the Treasury market selloffs that occurred over the last couple of weeks, which you alluded to and Trish Mosser and others have talked about.  One notable feature of those selloffs is that they at times were accompanied by substantial market chatter about the possibility that we might intervene or increase our purchase programs in order to limit yield increases. Now, this highlights for me a communication challenge that I think we are likely to face several times again.  We have embarked on an asset-purchase program of a certain size, and we didnt discuss much how program size could or would or should or ought to vary with circumstances.  Even though there is language in the directive that says it ought to vary with circumstances, we didnt really talk about the way in which it ought to change with evolving circumstances.  That language is in the directive.  So you can see how the private sector might have been encouraged to think that, if we get surprised by something, we might react by changing our purchase programs.  I think that market participants believe about our programs that we want to lower borrowing costs and to lower them in particular markets like mortgages, credit cards, or auto loans. And that connection, which I think has been made in a lot of market participants minds, would lead naturally to the supposition that we want to reduce yields on things like Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities.  From there it is just a short step to the notion that we might react to unexpected increases in yields with an expansion of our purchase program. But as you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, there are a lot of reasons that yields could increase in ways that wouldnt imply that we would have a motive to increase purchases.  In fact, some of 
  these reasons, if anything, would imply that we might want to consider backing off or reducing the scale of our purchases. Better growth prospects, for example, indicate perhaps a reduced need for stimulus. Higher expected inflation or reduced probability attached to the possibility of deflation would seem to suggest reduced stimulus.  Higher federal deficitsagain, if we were to increase our purchases, that would amount to sort of monetizing the debt.  Or if we were to try to offset the effect of higher deficits on yields, that would amount essentially to monetizing some of the debt, which would be inflationary. I do not think we want to do that. To my mind, this arises in part because of the degree to which we have emphasized the asset side of our balance sheet rather than the liability side.  The way I have communicated about our stimulus and our asset purchases is to refer to them generally in terms of the overall stimulus that the programs are supplying.  So in the weeks ahead and maybe even the months ahead, when 
we get to episodes in which yields change in an unexpected way and people are talking about how we are going to react, my own view is that articulating this in terms of the overall stimulus we are providing and de-emphasizing borrowing costs and interest rates in particular market segments might be useful.  In addition, sort of in conjunction with that, it might be useful to emphasize other developments that could be affecting yields for plausible reasons that would obviously not warrant an increase in stimulusimproving credit market conditions, reduced downside risks to inflation, and so on. So those are just the remarks I have, but again, it was out of a concern that recent market events and commentary on them seemed to indicate some uncertainty and confusion about our potential reaction functionin this case, thinking of our reaction function as being asset purchases as a function of incoming information, like yields.  I was just struck by the extent to which markets put some probability on the notion that we might increase the scale of our 
  intervention to try to damp the increase in yields, which I think in this case would be pretty clearly the wrong thing to do.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Lacker.  You raise some interesting points. In testimony and other contexts, I have said a couple of times that we werent trying to defend any particular interest rate, which I think is appropriate given that, as you point out, interest rates can change for different reasons.  So I think that your point is well taken.  Other questions or comments? All right.  If there is no other discussion, I appreciate the opportunity to talk a bit about these issues.  Clearly, there is a lot more that we are going to learn between now and a couple of weeks from now, and in particular, we do have a very full program of staff materials about various aspects of this.  I hope that we are going to show some learning by doing here and that, as we go forward, we will refine our tactics and our strategy; and having this input is very helpful. I would like to just mention to you that Debbie is pointing out to me that everyone has now agreed with the proposed schedule of 2010 FOMC meetings, and so if there are no objections, we are going to release that schedule to the public at the end of this week.  Anything else? Okay.  Thank you very much for your time, and we will see you in Washington in a few weeks, if not sooner. Thank you. END OF MEETING 
             
  
 
 _______________   Attended Tuesdays session only. Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 2324, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 23, 2009, at 1:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday June 24, 2009, at 9:00 
a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMessrs. Bullard and Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Weinberg, and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
   
      
 
     
  _______________   Attended Tuesdays session only. Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Messrs. Greenlee, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wascher, Associate Directors, Divisions of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Messrs. Carpenter and Perli, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Kiley, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Lindner, Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Wood, Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Messrs. Driscoll, King, and McCarthy, Economists, Division of Monetary, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively Mr. Judd, Advisor to the President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Messrs. Feldman, Hilton, Krane, McAndrews, Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Messrs.  Schweitzer, Sellon, and Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, New York, Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, New York, Cleveland, Kansas City, and St. Louis, respectively 
 Ms. Logan, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
                                                    1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).       Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on June 23-24, 2009 June 23, 2009Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  This is a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board, as has been our custom in the past, so I need a motion to close the meeting. MR. KOHN. So moved. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Let me first welcome Brian Sack officially in his role as manager of the System Open Market Account.  We look forward to a long and productive association. I also want to mention that I know theres a great deal of interest in the Administrations financial regulatory reform plan and its implications for the Federal Reserve.  Tomorrow at lunch after the meeting, I will update you on what I know about it, and then we can have some discussion if youd like. We have a substantial number of presentations today.  The staff has made an extraordinary effort to provide us with a great deal of background information on the balance sheet, reserve management, exit strategy, and important related issues.  If the Committee is willing, Id like to go straight through the first set of presentations with clarifying questions only and then have as much Q&A as the Committee would like and then a general discussion.  If thats all right, then lets begin with Brian Sack to report on market developments. MR. SACK.1  Financial markets improved further over the period since the last FOMC meeting, with risky asset prices rising on net, financial institutions raising new capital, and money markets continuing to heal.  Those developments reflect, and in turn support, greater optimism about the economic outlook.  However, one 
          consequence of these events was that intermediate- and long-term interest rates came under significant upward pressure. As can be seen in chart 1, Treasury coupon yields moved up markedly over the intermeeting period, with increases of 20 to 80 basis points.  The run-up was initially concentrated in longer-term yields, but more recently it spilled over into the two-year 
yield as well. The rise in the two-year yield was driven in part by a shift in monetary policy expectations, as the green shoots theme continued to gain traction.  As shown in chart 2, expectations of monetary policy tightening this year remain limited, but the market now anticipates nearly 200 basis points of tightening over 2010. The upward movement in Treasury yields was the largest, however, at horizons beyond the next year or two, as can be seen in the shift in the yield curve in chart 3.  The upward pressure on longer-term Treasury yields came from a variety of sources, including an improved economic outlook, an associated reduction in the risk of deflation, substantial increases in the supply of Treasury debt, the need to hedge mortgage convexity exposure as rates increased, and an ongoing reveto-quality flows.  Our survey of primary dealers indicated that many of these factors were seen as important, as summarized in chart 4.  An increase in upside inflation risk was also cited as a relevant, but less important, factor.  The upward pressure on yields occurred despite the fact that the Federal Reserve continued to take considerable amounts of duration onto its own books through the large-scale asset purchase programs.  As shown in chart 5, the SOMA continued to accumulate longer-term assets through the three programs initiated by the FOMC.  As the chart indicates, those purchases have proceeded at a relatively steady pace towards their mandated sizes.  As summarized to the right in chart 6, the Desk has purchased $170 billion of Treasury securities to date, $90 billion of agency securities, and $577 billion of MBS. Our dealer survey indicated that market participants are not expecting much expansion of the programs beyond the currently stated limits.  The median survey response indicated no expected increase in the size of the agency and MBS programs and only a 15 percent chance of expansion of the Treasury program at this meeting, with the peak amount of Treasury purchases put at $363 billion. Given their current sizes, these programs have had different degrees of importance in their respective markets.  For Treasury securities, the SOMA purchases 
have simply been overwhelmed by new issuance.  As shown in chart 7, the supply of new Treasury debt is far outpacing the accumulation by SOMA, leaving the market to digest considerable amounts of new debt and putting upward pressure on yields.  That is not the case for MBS, however, where the Feds purchases to date have been large relative to the size of the market and the flow of new supply. This pattern may explain why the MBS purchases have had such a notable effect on the MBS rate. As shown in chart 8, the MBS current coupon rate fell sharply after the program was announced, both because the Treasury yield declined and because 
       the spread to Treasuries narrowed.  That movement prompted a major refinancing wave, with nearly the entire universe of outstanding fixed-rate mortgage loans becoming refinanceable.  The MBS rate subsequently remained near 4 percent, even as the Treasury yield began to move up, in part because of a perception that SOMA purchases would be used to hold the line at that level.  More recently, though, the MBS rate began to rise, with two important factors amplifying that movement.  First, the rise in yields reduced repayment risk, extending the duration of outstanding mortgages and causing mortgage holders and servicers to try to shed duration elsewherethe convexity hedging mentioned above.  Second, market participants came to understand that the Fed would not ramp up the pace of its MBS purchases significantly in reaction to upward pressure on the MBS rate, in contrast to the expectations of many.  On balance, the MBS rate is 80 basis points higher than at the time of the last FOMC meeting.  Much of that change has showed through to the primary mortgage rate, which has increased about 60 basis points. Overall, our view is that the purchase programs have kept Treasury yields and mortgage rates lower than they otherwise would have been, though they are no longer at the very low levels that were observed ahead of the last FOMC meeting. The move towards higher yields has been accompanied by considerable chatter in the market about inflation risks.  As shown in chart 9, break-even inflation rates moved up notably with the backup in nominal yields, with the five-year, five-year forward measure (the Barclays measure) approaching 2.5 percent.  However, some of the rise in recent months appears to reflect that the risk of low inflation has been pared and that the liquidity of TIPS has improved.  Break-even inflation rates have not reached levels that would suggest that either inflation expectations or perceived upside inflation risks were unusually high. That interpretation is largely confirmed by the distribution of longer-term inflation outcomes from our dealer survey, chart 10.  The chart shows the evolution of the distribution over the last three FOMC meetings.  In general, respondents have been shaving down the left tail, with most of the mass 
making its way into the 2 percent to 2.5 percent bucket rather than into the upper tail.  Still, it is important to note that the inflation outlook is now seen as much more balanced, as reflected in both the survey and the level of break-even inflation rates. I will close my discussion of yields by taking a longer-term perspective.  Although it seems that many factors are putting upward pressure on Treasury yields, the yield curve is essentially showing the same degree of steepness that has occurred 
around or just after the end of previous recessions, as can be seen in chart 11.  Thus, despite the unprecedented fiscal deficits and the unprecedented expansion of reserves, the yield curve is not doing anything unprecedented.  Of course, one potential 
explanation is that the large-scale asset purchase programs have prevented a more severe steepening. The greater prospects for an economic recovery are also reflected in a broad set of risky asset prices. Corporate yield spreads, chart 12, came down significantly, with the investment-grade and high-yield spreads narrowing by 176 and 405 basis points, 
         respectively, over the intermeeting period.  That narrowing has more than offset the increase in Treasury yields, leaving corporate borrowing costs lower.  With more favorable costs, corporate issuers have brought a heavy flow of new bonds to the market in recent months.  Equity prices also advanced on net over the intermeeting period, despite some backtracking over the past week or so.  As shown in chart 13, the S&P index gained about 5 percent, continuing the recovery seen since the trough in March. The recovery in equities has been driven in part by the view that downside growth risks have diminished.  One indication of this is that the negative skewness of equity outcomes implied by options (the light blue line) has fallen notably from the very elevated levels reached last fall.  The willingness of investors to move back into risky assets, both here and abroad, has contributed to a weakening of the dollar, chart 14, with the broad dollar index off by about 5 percent. The positive sentiment in markets has been driven in part by better prospects for banks. As shown in chart 15, share prices of the large financial institutions included in the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (or SCAP) have moved sharply 
higher since March, far outperforming broader equity indexes.  There may be several reasons for this outperformance, but the SCAP process clearly played a role.  The test results provided some clarity to investors about the capital needs of those institutions and, overall, indicated that those needs were less severe than had been earlier feared.  This information was greeted favorably by market participants.  Since the release, many of those institutions have been able to raise new capital, as shown by the solid bars in chart 16, which has helped to fill the capital needs identified by the SCAP, the hollow bars. In total, the SCAP institutions have raised or announced plans to raise $70 billion in new capital. In addition, they have issued more than $35 billion in new 
debt, including $25 billion that did not use the FDIC guarantee program.  Lastly, 10 large financial institutions were approved to repay TARP funds and returned $68 billion collectively to the Treasury last week. The better sentiment about banks and other financial institutions has helped to improve conditions in money markets.  In the market for unsecured lending, the 
three-month LIBOROIS spread continued to fall, as shown in chart 17, and has now dipped below 50 basis pointsits lowest level since early 2008.  However, the spreads on LIBOR at longer maturities still remain unusually elevated, and the liquidity and functioning of the LIBOR market is still strained.  Secured funding markets show a similar patternongoing improvement, but remaining far from 
normal, with considerable uncertainty about what normal will turn out to be in the 
new environment. The improvement in term funding markets has allowed the markets to become less dependent on the liquidity facilities provided by the Federal Reserve.  This is a natural development and, indeed, a positive sign, in that some of the facilities were priced to be relatively unattractive once market conditions became less strained.  As shown in chart 18, the shrinkage has spanned almost all components of the liquidity facilities, with the total amount of short-term credit provided falling to about half its level at the beginning of the year. 
            Another sign of policy traction comes in the consumer credit markets.  Recent TALF subscriptions have been larger and have covered a more diverse set of asset classes. As can be seen in chart 19, the total issuance of TALF-eligible ABS jumped to about $30 billion in the second quarter.  In addition, and perhaps even more encouraging, some ABS deals have been coming to the market without TALF support, bringing the total amount of ABS issuance for the quarter to about $40 billion. Thus, there are signs that the consumer ABS market is at least starting to get back on its feet. The liquidity being provided to the ABS market and the return of investor confidence in that market have caused spreads on triple-A-rated ABS to narrow 
considerably, as shown in chart 20 for auto and credit card paper.  These improvements in the secondary market rates should help to make credit available on more favorable terms to businesses and households.  However, improvement in the CMBS [commercial-mortgage-backed securities] market has been more tenuous.  
Spreads on senior CMBS have narrowed by much less from their peak and have moved higher of late. Newly issued CMBS were the focus of the most recent TALF subscription, and there was no participation.  That outcome was expected, though, as it takes time for issuers to originate the paper that would be eligible.  Given the strains in the CMBS market, we anticipate that CMBS activity in the TALF will pick up over time.  Overall, as shown in chart 21, the total balance sheet of the Federal Reserve has remained around $2 trillion since last December.  However, that pattern masks the significant rotation that is taking place in the composition of the balance sheet.  As noted above, the share of the balance sheet associated with short-term lending operations (the orange area) is shrinking notably, while the Systems holdings of longer-term assets (the blue area) continue to grow.  Going forward, we expect the total portfolio to expand further, as the ongoing growth in the asset-purchase programs will outweigh further declines in the liquidity facilities. That concludes my prepared remarks on financial market developments.  Let me now turn to the separate issue of whether to expand the existing SOMA securities lending program to include agency debt securities held by the SOMA.  A memo was circulated to the FOMC in advance of todays meeting to describe this proposal and its economic rationale. The intention of the proposed change is to make SOMA holdings of agency debt available to the market in order to foster improved liquidity and secondary market functioning for agency securities.  Through an auction format, dealers could pay a fee to borrow a particular security, offering a Treasury security in exchange as collateral.  This allows the dealer to obtain individual agency securities that might be in short supply in the market. 
                                                     2 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).         The potential for scarcity problems in agency debt arises in part from limited new supply and in part from the Feds asset-purchase program.  Agency debt purchases of $200 billion would represent approximately 35 percent of total outstanding agency benchmark debt.  Dealers are already expressing some unwillingness to short agency issues due to concerns about their ability to close out suto-deliver in agency securities have not been substantial, we believe that they could rise if there were another bout of financial market strain.  Indeed, agency debt does not benefit from the new fails penalty that was recently implemented for Treasury 
securities, possibly making them more susceptible to an episode of widespread fails.  Making SOMA holdings available to the market would address these concerns, which should help to support market liquidity. Let me make two additional points about the program.  First, it involves little risk for the Federal Reserve, as it is swapping an agency debt security for a Treasury security, with a small haircut applied.  Second, it puts the agency program on a par with the Treasury debt and MBS programs, as those already have comparable strategies in place. In particular, Treasury securities held in SOMA are already included in the securities lending program, and SOMA holdings of MBS can be made available to the market on a temporary basis through dollar roll transactions.   This proposal is not covered by the current Desk authorization and thus requires an amendment to the authorization, as indicated in our memo to the Committee.  That concludes my prepared remarks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. If there are no clarifying questions, let me go next to Seth Carpenter to talk about the balance sheet. MR. CARPENTER.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Earlier there was material distributed entitled FOMC Briefing on Projections of the Balance Sheet, the Monetary Base, and Federal Reserve Income. For this meeting, the staff has again prepared projections of the balance sheet under various alternatives.  Here we focus on the baseline and expanded purchase scenarios that were presented in the Bluebook.  The baseline scenario involves maintaining the currently announced limits of the FOMCs asset purchase programs, while the expanded purchase scenario depicts a case in which the purchases of Treasury securities are expanded from $300 billion to 
$750 billion, consistent with alternative A from the Bluebook.  The staff sent the Committee a memorandum that projects Federal Reserve income using the baseline balance sheet projections and various assumptions for interest rates.  In this briefing, I will summarize the balance sheet and income projections. The charts in exhibit 1 illustrate the underlying assumptions for the baseline and expanded purchase scenarios.  The dotted lines present the projections made for the April meeting.  Several factors account for the differences from the previous 
meetings projections.  First, we have made some technical adjustments to our 
         assumptions for securities holdings, the most significant of which is a slower assumed prepayment rate for MBS.  As a result, MBS holdings end the projection period almost $200 billion higher than in our last projections.  Second, we have also adjusted our assumptions regarding the credit and liqthan-projected usage. Most notably, as shown on the second page, loan issuance under the TALF has been revised downward significantly because of the experience with the facility to date and revised staff views of likely use in the future. As shown in exhibit 2, under the baseline scenario, the balance sheet peaks at about $2.8 trillion at the end of this year.  In subsequent years, TALF loans are repaid and securities mature, or are prepaid in the case of MBS, so the balance sheet contracts to just under $1.5 trillion at the end of 2016.  On the liabilities side, currency grows steadily and eventually returns to being the largest liability item. Reserve balances shrink reflecting the runoff in assets and the growth in currency.  Exhibit 3 presents the projections for the expanded purchase scenario.  The results are qualitatively similar, but total assets peak at a higher level at the end of this year and remain slightly higher than in the baseline for the projection period.  Corresponding projections for the monetary base are presented in exhibit 4.  Continued large-scale asset purchases lead to rapid expansion of the base from August through the end of the year, with annualized growth rates of around 100 percent. Early next year, the contraction of the balance sheet resulting from the cessation of LSAPs and the runoff of liquidity facilities causes reserve balances to shrink more rapidly than currency expands.  As a result, for each remaining year in the projection, the monetary base contracts. The substantial changes to the size and composition of the Federal Reserves balance sheet pose risks to the Systems net income that were summarized in a staff 
memorandum to the Committee dated June 17, 2009.  The memo concentrated on two 
risks. The first risk is that, as the policy rate is increased, the income that the Reserve Banks earn on largely fixed-rate assets becomes insufficient to offset expenses, most importantly the interest expense on reserve balances.  The second risk is the possibility that increases in interest rates reduce the market value of the SOMA portfolio so that, in the event that the Desk needs to sell some of these securities to drain reserves to raise the federal funds rate, the System realizes capital losses.  The analysis presented in the memo suggests that, using the baseline projection for the balance sheet, the first risk is not significant under most plausible scenarios, but the second risk is important to consider.   Exhibit 5 summarizes projections of Federal Reserve income and remittances to the Treasury under three different scenarios for interest rates.  The first row shows the baseline with interest rates consistent with those in the Greenbook, that is, the Greenbook as it was iterating on Tuesday, June 16, just before finalization.  The black line in the top left panel presents gross income for the Federal Reserve System, which is driven largely by interest income from the SOMA portfolio, and the red region represents total expenses, which is driven significantly by interest paid on reserve 
                                                    3 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).         balances, which leaves the grey region as net income for the System prior to distribution of dividends. To the right, subtracting dividends paid on Reserve Bank capital and other transfersthe red regionleaves excess earnings that are remitted to the Treasury as interest on Federal Reserve notes, the grey region.  In the second row, which uses an interest rate path consistent with current market rates, remittances 
to the Treasury remain sizable and, in fact, exceed the average remittance to the 
Treasury over the past ten years. The bottom row, however, shows a scenario where 
interest rates rise sharplyin this case, the federal funds rate rises to as high as 8 percent by the end of 2011and interest expense drives net income to zero, and, as 
shown in the bottom right panel, remittances to the Treasury are projected to be zero from 2011 to 2013. The memo also presented approximate unrealized mark-to-market losses for the SOMA portfolio, which are summarized in exhibit 6.  At the end of the first quarter of this year, the SOMA portfolio was in a modest gain position, illustrated by the blue 
line for the baseline starting slightly below zerothat is, with negative losses because the legacy holdings of Treasury securities had an average coupon above market rates.  Under the Greenbook projection, longer-term interest rates do not rise appreciably above current levels until 2013, and the portfolio shifts to a modest loss position around that time. Under the market-based scenario, losses mount more quickly, and before long the portfolio has unrealized losses of about $100 billion.  As a result, if one-third of the portfolio were sold to drain reserves and so one-third of the total portfolio losses were realized, those losses could conceivably wipe out the remittances to the Treasury.  Under the high-interest-rate scenario, the red line, losses are even higher and mount more quickly.  In such a case, the sale of securities could quickly lead to significant realized capital losses.  As Jim and Spence will discuss, however, it is not necessarily the case that the Desk will need to sell securities, as other tools will be available when the Committee deems it appropriate to tighten the 
stance of monetary policy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Let me turn now to Bill English to talk about the effects of high reserve balances on bank balance sheets. MR. ENGLISH.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill be referring to the exhibits that are labeled FOMC Briefing on Possible Effects of Very High Reserve Balances on Bank Balance Sheets. As shown in the top left panel of your first exhibit, Federal Reserve actions in response to the financial crisis have led to a substantial increase in 
reserve balances held by depository institutions.  And, as shown by the dashed lines, 
the rise in reserve balances is projected to continue through the end of this year, under either the baseline scenario considered in the Bluebookthe blue linewhich reflects already planned purchases of Treasury, agency, and mortgage-backed securities, or the alternative scenariothe red linewhich includes additional purchases of $450 billion of Treasury securities later this year.  I should note that the projections shown here have been updated from those presented in the memorandum 
       sent to the Committee on June 12, 2009, and are consistent with the balance sheet projections included in the June Bluebook.   All else equal, the projected rise in reserve balances implies an increase in the assets of depository institutions. To the extent that depository institutions or their creditors and counterparties are concerned about the resulting decline in the ratio of capital to assets, depository institutions may choose to reduce their lending or sell securities in order to limit the increase in their assets.  Such concerns could be driven in part by the regulatory leverage ratio. As shown to the right, unlike the risk-based capital ratios, the leverage ratio is based on average total assets, including reserve balances. Thus, an increase in a banks reserve holdings, all else equal, reduces its leverage ratio. Under the U.S. banking agencies Prompt Corrective Action rules for insured commercial banks, banks must maintain a minimum leverage ratio of at least 5.0 percent to be well-capitalized. While individual banks can reduce their reserve holdings, in most cases such efforts simply shift reserves to other institutions, leaving the aggregate reserve holdings of the banking sector unchanged. To examine the possible effects of the anticipated increase in reserve balances, we projected the leverage ratios of commercial banks at the end of the first quarter of next year. As noted in the middle left panel, in doing so, we assumed that aggregate reserve balances would expand in line with the baseline or alternative Bluebook scenarios and that balances held by each institution would rise in proportion to the projected increase in aggregate balances.  We assumed that the levels of other bank 
assets remain unchanged.  In our projections, tier 1 capital declines over the next few quartersreflecting write-downs, loan losses, and other factorswith the decline assumed to be about half as large as that projected in the SCAP results for the nineteen largest banking organizations in the more adverse scenario. The resulting projections under the baseline scenario for reserve balances are summarized in the middle right panel.  Even with the significant decline in tier 1 capital and the substantial growth in reserve balances expected by the first quarter of next year, shown in the first two rows, the aggregate leverage ratio, the bottom row, is projected to remain well above regulatory norms. Nonetheless, as shown by the dashed blue line in the bottom left panel, under these assumptions, the aggregate leverage ratio does fall below the range seen over the past 10 years. However, this calculation does not take account of the likelihood that some portion of the capital raised in response to the SCAP will be downstreamed by bank holding companies to their subsidiary banks.  If all such capital were downstreamed, the result would be an aggregate leverage ratio at the high end of the recent rangeshown by the dotted blue line.  (In these projections, we assume that repayments of government capital are made with resources at the bank holding company level and so do not affect the capital ratios of subsidiary banks.)  The red dashed and dotted lines on the graph show the effect on the aggregate leverage ratio of a larger increase in reserve balances, consistent with the alternative scenario for the 
             Federal Reserves balance sheet.  These projections are somewhat lower than the baseline projections, but they suggest a generally similar conclusion. As noted in the bottom right, we also prepared projections of the leverage ratios of consolidated bank holding companies, and obtained broadly similar results, even taking account of the recent repayments of government capital.  Our projections of 
leverage ratios for individual commercial banks (not shown) suggest that they could fall to low levels relative to regulatory norms for some banks.  Most notably, the projected leverage ratio for Bank of America is only 5.01 percent in our baseline projection in the absence of a capital infusion from its parent holding company.  However, as noted earlier, individual depository institutions can take steps to reduce 
unwanted accumulations of reserves. Now please turn to the top panel of your next exhibit.  To learn more about how banking organizations view current reserve levels and how they might respond to further increases in reserve balances, we consulted with senior Federal Reserve supervisory staff at some of the largest banking institutions and with staff at the Open 
Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  These consultations indicated that banking organizations have not expressed material concerns to System staff about their own level of reserve balances or the overall level of reserves in the system.  Indeed, some banks have intentionally maintained high levels of reserve balances as a liquidity buffer, while others have profited at times by exploiting the spread between the rate paid on excess reserves and the cost of borrowing in the 
federal funds market.  Banks generally thought that they could reduce their reserve balances if they chose to by lending in funding markets, purchasing securities, or reducing interest rates on deposits.  It is important to note, however, that banking organizations have not discussed with System staff the possible effects of the increase in Systemwide reserves that will accompany continued large-scale asset purchases.  As the supply of reserve balances rises, some depository institutions may find it more difficult than they had anticipated to reduce the size of their balance sheets. As summarized in the bottom left panel, this analysis suggests that depository institutions should not be significantly adversely affected by the anticipated levels of reserve balances. As a result, no policy response appears necessary at this time.  However, considerable uncertainty remains. Reserve balances could rise further than currently projected if economic conditions called for additional asset purchases or 
Federal Reserve lending. And banks losses could prove larger than we assumed perhaps running closer to the level projected in the SCAP.  Finally, with financial markets still fragile and pressures on institutions liquidity still a concern, banking organizations may want larger-than-usual buffers of capital relative to regulatory norms.  Given these uncertainties, the staff will continue to monitor the effect of Federal Reserve operations on the size of depository institutions balance sheets and 
their willingness to provide credit. 
         If policymakers became concerned that increases in reserve balances were having adverse effects on banks intermediation activities, several policy options, shown to the right, could be considered. First, the Federal Reserve could drain reserves by several means, including outright sales of securities, reverse repurchase agreements, orif it received authority from the Congressby issuing Federal Reserve bills.  Those options will be discussed in the presentation by Jim Clouse and Spence Hilton. Second, supervisors could, on a temporary basis, exclude all or part of reserve balances from the calculation of the leverage ratio for all banking institutions.  Providing temporary leverage ratio relief in this way could ease banks regulatory-capital-related balance sheet pressures.  However, a change in the calculation of the leverage ratio would be difficult to negotiate with the other U.S. federal banking agencies. And if relief were granted for reserve balances, even on a temporary basis, due at least in part to the risk-free nature of reserve balances, regulators might have to consider comparable relief for other risk-free assets to preserve consistency and reduce distortions. In making such changes, the simplicity and comprehensiveness ofthe leverage ratio would be lost.   Third, to avoid the difficulties that could be associated with a blanket change in the calculation of the leverage ratio, supervisors could, on a temporary basis, exclude all or part of reserve balances from the calculation of the leverage ratio on a targeted basis for selected banking institutions with particularly large inflows of reserve balances. Finally, supervisors could issue guidance indicating that temporary decreases in the leverage ratio resulting from accumulations of reserve balances should not 
significantly adversely affect supervisory assessments of banks capital adequacy, 
given the low risk posed by reserve holdings and the recognition by supervisors that the increase in reserve balances is the temporary result of monetary policy actions.  Such guidance, perhaps in the form of an interagency statement, could acknowledge the impact of increased reserve balances on leverage ratios, explain the reason for the elevated levels of reserves, and note the very low risk associated with reserve balances. Thank you. That concludes my prepared remarks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Bill. Let me turn now to Trish Mosser on large-scale asset purchases. MS. MOSSER. The recent rise in long-term yields has highlighted a number of challenges to the large-scale asset purchase programschallenges related both to policy intent and to implementation.  In light of the recent changes in market and 
macroeconomic conditions, my briefing discusses a few potential changes (large and 
small) to the purchase programs that the Committee may consider going forward.   
      In order to help frame your thinking, and ours, about the purchase programs, the staff prepared a note discussing whether the effects of purchases come about primarily through changes to stocks or flows of assets.  Basic theoretical models point mainly to stocks affecting interest rates.  But practical market considerations, finance microstructure models, and our experience with purchase programs to date suggest that both the stock and the pace of asset purchases can effect yields.  The purchase programs all produced significant announcement effects, suggesting that the expected decline in the stock of assets lowered yields.  For Treasuries, the stock effect appears to be more important than the flow effect, perhaps because the Treasury market is highly liquid with good price transparency and predictable supply, so informational asymmetries and inventory frictions that are associated with flow effects are smaller.  
Also, the Treasury program is by far the smallest relative to the size of the overall market, so flows of purchases are likely to have a smaller ongoing impact on yields.   In contrast, both the MBS and the agency debt purchase programs are large relative to the size of their respective markets, and, in both cases, the size and pace of new supply is quite uncertain, leaving more scope for the Feds purchases to have a significant ongoing effect on prices.  As a result, it is not surprising that the Feds purchases caused not only up-front announcement effects, but also ongoing reductions in MBS and agency spreads as markets adjusted to the pace of purchases.  As Brian noted in his presentation, in recent weeks when it became clear to market participants that the pace of MBS purchases would not be adjusted as yields edged higher, MBS (and mortgage) rates rose sharply.  Of course, the convexity of mortgages and MBS was the main reason that the backup in mortgage yields was so large and so quick, but some of the increase in yields reflected adjustments to market expectations of the program, based on the Desks flow of purchases. Regardless of what changes, if any, the Committee decides to make to the purchase programs, our analysis, and particularly our recent experience, highlight the ongoing need for clear public communication about the policy intent and goals of the purchase programs as well as about their implementation.  Moreover, given that both the stock and flow of Fed purchases appear to influence yields and spreads, we believe there are number of program changes that the Committee may wish to 
consider. Broadly speaking, these changes fall into two categories:  (1) changes specifically related to size and flexibility of the programsin other words, related to stock and flow effects of the programs, and (2) other implementation changes to enhance the effectiveness of the programs. Let me start with the options related to the size and flexibility of the programs.  If the Committee believes that the recent run-up in long-term yields represents an unwelcome tightening of credit conditions inconsistent with the appropriate stance of policy, then an expansion of the LSAP program may be attractive.  Given its small size, the Treasury purchase program is a logical candidate for such an expansion.  A large expansionfor example, of up to $750 billion through year-endwould be a surprise to the market, and, in the staffs view, it would significantly lower long-term 
      yields. Of course, such an expansion could also increase concerns about debt monetization and perhaps inflation. Alternatively, a more modest expansion/extensionto $450 billion through year-endmight be attractive because it would raise fewer concerns about debt monetization. This change could be communicated as a continuation of the current program and an alignment of the end dates of all three purchase programs, with an additional note that all may be adjusted in the future depending on the economic outlook and financial conditions.  This may be particularly attractive if you believe it is premature to plan and communicate the end of the Treasury purchase program.  The Treasury program endgame will certainly move to the forefront of market and policy discussions if the Treasury program is kept unchanged. Expansion of the MBS purchase program is another option that has the advantage of being (half) a step removed from debt monetization.  However, given reduced expectations for new MBS issuance and the already large size of the program, the staff has some concerns that a larger MBS program would run the risk of SOMA purchases distorting market functioning.  For reasons that we have highlighted in the past, we do not recommend expanding the agency debt program, given its large size and its impact to date.   While the staff does not recommend explicitly reallocating funds across the various purchase programs (e.g., reducing the MBS program and reallocating to Treasury purchases), the Committee might want to consider implementation strategies that increase the flexibility of the programs.   Regardless of what the Committee decides about the size of the purchase programs, it could consider a portfolio approach in which the timing, size, and 
particularly the composition of purchases are adjusted in response to market 
conditions, done in a manner that makes the most efficient use of the Feds balance sheet. For example, in a scenario of rising yields and narrowing spreads on MBS and 
agencies, the Desk could shift toward purchasing Treasuries; in a scenario of falling yields and widening spreads, the Desk could shift purchases away from Treasuries and toward MBS and agencies; and in a scenario of declining yields and narrowing 
spreads, the Desk could simply purchase less of everything.  This approach could have the added advantage of containing the future size of the balance sheet to the extent that it targets purchases where they are perceived to have the greatest policy impact.  It could also help to reduce volatility and minimize market distortions of the purchase programs.  However, this approach also entails a significant complication in that such changes to Desk operations would presumably require the Committee to articulate to 
the Desk and to the market what its reaction function is.  Formulating this reaction function would be difficult, partly because the appropriate levels of spreads and yields would depend on both macroeconomic and financial conditions. Setting (and 
communicating about) a policy stance that is dependent on macro and financial 
         conditions is what the Committee does in normal times, of course.  But these are neither normal policy circumstances nor normal operating procedures. To pull this off 
in present circumstances may be quite complex. Alternatively the Committee could move in the direction of giving the Desk more flexibility within asset classes by purchasing larger quantities when spreads and yields are rising and fewer assets when they are falling.  This approachif appropriately formulated, communicated, and executedhas the advantage that it could reduce volatility and consequently, perhaps, lessen the need for actually making large adjustments to operations.  However, a flexible pace of purchases is likely to be credible only if the size of the purchase program is relatively large.  As a result, the staff would not recommend such a strategy for the Treasury purchase program at its current size. One final note on this topic: Selling put options is one way that the Desk could implement such a flexible, responsive approach to the purchase programs.  A strategy of buying more when the yields rise in effect provides investors with an option to sell to the Fed at a particular price.  Selling the option explicitly would not only allow us to capture the value of that commitment, but it also would provide a hedging vehicle to the market, which, in turn, might reduce hedging costs and thus risk premiums.  But an options strategy involves the same communication challenges that I have already noted. If the Committee is interested in exploring this further, the staff would need a few weeks to address several legal and implementation issues.  Whatever the Committees views are on the merits of changing the size or flexibility of the purchase programs, a couple of additional implementation issues deserve your attention. First and most importantly, the Committee could consider how it would like to handle the phaseout of purchase programs, the so-called cliff effects.  If one believes that the purchase programs affect yields only through the stock of assets, then cliff effects on yields are unlikely. However, if the flow of purchases affects yields at allthe staff believes we have seen some evidence of thisthen it may be prudent to consider a slow phaseout of purchase programs in the weeks either preceding or just beyond the programs end dates.  In particular, if no changes are made to the Treasury purchase program, the staff believes there is a risk of a cliff effect in yields in September, so we request the Committees views on the advisability of phasing out purchases slowly. In addition, the Committee might wish to discuss how it would like to communicate its intention regarding phaseout to the public. Second, the staff recommends that agency MBS purchases be expanded to include securitizations of hybrid ARMs.  To date, the MBS purchase program has been concentrated in purchases of 15- and 30-year securities.  Adding hybrids would likely narrow what are currently very wide spreads in that sector and so ease credit conditions for borrowers who are not benefiting from the current program. Hybrids would also reduce the duration of our MBS purchases and thus limit the Systems 
                                                    4 The materials used by Messrs. Clouse and Hilton are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).      exposure to income and capital risk.  However, because this program is likely to be quite small, that effect would not be large.  Purchases of hybrids are covered by the current directive and thus would not require further explicit authorization by the Committee.  Although ARMs are slightly more complicated to purchase than fixed-rate MBS, a hybrid purchase program can be implemented in a matter of days. Our recommendation is to add purchases of ARMs with fixed-rate lockups of at least three years in order to avoid the risk that market participants would incorrectly infer signals about the near-term path of short-term rates. A final implementation strategy that the Committee may want to consider is to increase the duration of Treasury purchases.  If the Committee would like a bigger bang for the buck on yields, shifting Treasury purchases to maturities seven years and longer will remove more duration from the private sector and, according to portfolio theories, likely lower yields. On the other hand, such a shift runs the risk of distorting the yield curve, and, of course, it would increase the duration and interest rate risk of the SOMA portfolio. Ill close by summarizing what we see as the key decision points and staff recommendations.  First, if the Committee is interested in expanding asset purchases, 
Treasuries appear to be best choice; of course, this topic is more a subject for tomorrows discussion than for todays.  Second, a portfolio approach to asset purchases has notable advantages, including the potential for a larger impact, but it requires more articulation of objectives and responsiveness, which may be complex to achieve in the current circumstances.  Third, the staff recommends tapering down purchases near the exit. And finally, buy hybrid ARMs. Thank you, and Im happy to take questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. At the last meeting I promised we would focus today a good bit on our exit strategy, that is, on how were going to unwind the policies that we have put in place. The last two presentations concentrate on that.  Let me turn first to Jim Clouse and Spence Hilton to talk about reserve management tools. MR. CLOUSE.4  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well be referring to the package entitled FOMC Briefing on Reserve Management Tools to Target a Higher Policy Rate. The FOMC memo on reserve management options described a number of possible tools that the Federal Reserve might employ to foster effective control of the federal funds rate even with a much expanded balance sheet.  The operational details of these various options were described in a series of accompanying memos, but it may be useful to note how these various options fit within the usual demand and supply paradigm in the reserve market. 
    In simple models, as shown by the red line in the top panel of exhibit 1, the hypothetical aggregate demand for reserves with interest paid on excess reserves at the so-called IOER rate should asymptote to just a touch above the IOER rate.  In practice, however, the actual demand curve seems to be more like the black line that extends somewhat below the IOER rate.  For much of the fourth quarter of last year, 
for example, federal funds regularly traded 50 basis points or more below the IOER rate. And in recent months, the effective federal funds rate has been about 10 basis 
points below IOER on average.  As best we can tell, this phenomenon has stemmed from a confluence of factors:  In particular, GSEs and others that earn no interest on overnight balances may have an incentive to lend in the funds market at rates below IOER; in addition, various impediments to arbitrage in the funds marketline limits, banks concerns about capital constraints, and possible adverse perceptions associated with significant overnight borrowing in the funds marketseem to have undermined the usual market forces that would ordinarily be expected to keep the federal funds rate close to the IOER rate. Consistent with this simple diagram, the various options discussed in the memo are classified under two basic headingsthose that aim to strengthen and shape the demand for reserves and those designed to reduce the supply of reserves.  As shown in the middle panel, the demand-side options are aimed at shifting the demand curve to the right, or making the curve flatter, that is, more interest-elastic, around the IOER rate, or some combination of the two. Options aimed at shifting the demand curve to the right include increasing reserve requirement ratios and establishing a system of voluntary requirements.  Simple calculations suggest that increasing required reserve ratios under the current structure to the maximum levels allowed under the Federal Reserve Act14 percent for 
transaction deposits and 9 percent for nonpersonal time deposits and net Eurocurrency liabilitiescould increase required reserve balances quite substantially.  Alternatively, as noted in the work presented to the FOMC in April of 2008, the Federal Reserve could develop a system of voluntary reserve requirements.  Similar to the current program of required clearing balances, depository institutions in this system could establish a voluntary requirement ahead of each two-week maintenance 
period. The rate of remuneration for balances held to meet such voluntary requirements would need to be above the rate of remuneration on excess reserve balances in order to induce banks to establish a significant level of voluntary requirements.  Options that might tend to flatten the demand curve include the payment of interest on reserves for all account holders.  Payment of interest on balances held by institutions such as Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Banks would likely increase their desired holdings of Fed balances and could induce them to 
arbitrage in the funds market if the federal funds rate were to dip below the IOER rate. As described in the note by Jamie McAndrews, the Federal Reserve may also be able to flatten the demand curve by establishing special accounts that would allow federal funds transactions to be collateralized by balances held at the Federal Reserve.  
   
     As shown in the bottom panel of the exhibit, the various supply-side tools described in the memoissuance of Fed bills, the development of term deposits, an expanded Supplementary Financing Program, expanded use of reverse repurchase agreements, and asset sales or scaled back liquidity programsall would work by shifting the supply of reserves to the left.   In the case of Fed bills, this would be accomplished through the issuance of short-term debt obligations of the Federal Reserve that could be purchased by a wide range of investors.  Fed bills could be purchased by depository institutions but would not count toward meeting reserve requirements.  Fed bills would be a very powerful tool for reserve management for the Federal Reserve but would require new legislation. A closely related tool discussed in the note by Steve Meyer would be a system of term deposits.  Term deposits would be issued only to depository institutions, perhaps via an auction mechanism or by posted rates.  These term deposits would not be eligible to satisfy reserve requirements and likely would be structured as nonnegotiable instruments.  For example, two-week term deposits could be offered at the start of each two-week maintenance period.  Of course, the return on such deposits would need to be high enough to induce banks to shift a significant portion of their holdings of overnight reserve balances into a term deposit. As yet another reserve-draining mechanism, the Federal Reserve could explore an expanded SFP in which the Treasury would issue special bills and place the proceeds with the Federal Reserve.  To be fully satisfactory from the Federal Reserves 
perspective, the Treasury would need to be obliged to meet Federal Reserve requests for SFP issuance, and the bills issued under an expanded SFP should be excluded from the federal debt ceiling. Another reserve-draining mechanism that could be employed would involve expanded use of triparty reverse repurchase agreements with Treasury, agency, and agency-backed MBS securities. As noted in the background memos, reverse RPs against Treasury and agency collateral will be feasible in the very near future.  The ability to arrange for triparty reverse RPs against agency MBS may take longer to put in placeperhaps by the end of this year. In the case of agency MBS, a very similar reserve-draining mechanism would involve temporary sales of our MBS holdings in the dollar roll market.   Finally, the Federal Reserve could conduct outright sales of assets or take steps to scale back credit provided through various liquidity facilities.  These mechanisms would almost certainly be successful in draining reserves but, as Spence will describe, would entail a number of important policy judgments. MR. HILTON. Thank you Jim.  If excess reserve levels were still high when the Committee again wishes to target short-term interest rates at levels above their effective minimum, then the starting point for raising market rates would likely be a 
              corresponding increase in the interest rate paid on excess reserves.  This is certain to put upward pressure on bank borrowing rates, including the overnight federal funds rate. Under improved conditions in financial markets, this by itself might well provide sufficient control over short-term rates, regardless of the levels of excess reserves. But if the Committee were dissatisfied with its control over market ratesthat is, should something like the experience of last fall recurthen the Committee would want to be in a position to respond quickly to exert tighter control.  For this reason, development of some of the tools that have been described is proceeding, even in the absence of any certainty that they would be employed when the time comes to tighten policy. Among the various measures described above for reducing excess reserves, some appear to offer greater potential in terms of their scale or in terms of their availability in the near term than others.  Several options introduce other issues apart from narrowly operational ones that would need to be addressed before they might be employed on a large scale, and we are beginning to look at some of these.  And for all the tools aimed at reducing reserve supply, we are not certain about the level of excess reserves that would be consistent with tight control over the federal funds rate; however, we can be confident that large reductions in excess reserves would eventually increase their scarcity value and, with it, short-term market rates. I will now quickly review the feasibility of some of the options that Jim presented with these additional issues and challenges in mind. Issuing Fed bills or a revised Supplementary Financing Program exempt from debt ceiling limits are attractive options partly because, unlike reverse RPs, they avoid any need for collateral and its administration, which should also make it more appealing to a broader investor base.  But either approach would require legislative action that appears to be problematic at this point. Selling SOMA assets on a large scale is operationally feasible even today.  But use of SOMA asset sales as a key tool to drain reserves could be limited by the possible effects on longer-term interest rates that would be hard to predict and on trading conditions that such sales would likely have in those markets.  In addition, asset sales could have significant effects on Federal Reserve capital, as described by Seth. Arranging reverse RPs against SOMA assets, including agency MBS, on a large scale likely would require developing counterparty relationships beyond the 
traditional primary dealer ones.  The dealers themselves are not natural lenders.  They 
could act as conduit between the Fed and lenders, but their willingness to play this role could be limited because of the effect it would have on the dealers own balance sheets. Ideally, we would want to reach lenders to banks, especially those currently receiving less than the interest rate on excess reserves on their lending.  This includes 
                                                     5 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).          the GSEs as possible counterparties, either as part of a broader reverse RP program or via separate operations arranged with these institutions.Arranging reverse dollar rolls with the agency MBS we accumulate is something we could do now. We are uncertain about how large a presence we could have in this marketthis is something we are exploringand the accounting treatment could require us to realize any capital losses on the agency MBS we delivered even if just on a temporary basis. The counterparties for term deposit arrangements that Jim described are, of course, the banks and other depository institutions directly.  At issue is what interestrate incentive would be needed to induce depository institutions in the aggregate to shift excess reserve balances into these term deposits, and specifically, how far above the interest rate on excess reserves this rate must be.  Its hard to calibrate depository 
institutions demand.  But experience with interest rate corridor systems suggests that maybe even spreads in the neighborhood of 50 basis points could incent banks to place most of their excess reserves deposits into term deposits.  This same observation also holds for the two options Jim mentioned for increasing banks demand for reserves:  the system of voluntary reserve targets or raising reserve requirements.  In either case, the question to be solved is the rate of remuneration on reserves held for these purposes relative to the interest rate on excess reserves. To sum up, in the future under more normal financial market conditions, the IOER framework could be a more viable tool for controlling the overnight federal funds rate or other short-term interest rates than it appeared to be last autumn.  Moreover, some potential exists for improving arbitrage in funding markets to tighten the relation between the IOER rate and overnight bank borrowing rates.  But the System could bring additional tools to bear that collectively could be used to reduce excess reserves on a large scale.  But apart from the remaining operational issues to 
be addressed, developing some of these tools to their full potential could involve additional issues, such as moving beyond traditional open market counterparties. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks very much.  And batting clean-up, Brian Madigan is going to talk about our credit and liquidity facilities. MR. MADIGAN.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill be referring to the material labeled Material for Briefing on Staff Proposal Regarding Liquidity Facilities. A number of the credit and liquidity facilities that the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee have established are scheduled to expire later this 
year. The PDCF, the TSLF, the AMLF, the MMIFF, the CPFF, and the dollar 
liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap lines are scheduled to expire on October 30. The TALF is scheduled to expire on December 31.  However, the TAF and the authorization for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have no fixed expiration date. 
              As noted in the memorandum and in various staff briefing documents, the usage of most of the liquidity facilities has declined in recent months as market conditions have improved.  Indeed, amounts outstanding under several of the facilities have contracted noticeably further in the days since we completed our memorandum. In considering whether to modify, extend, suspend, or terminate the various programs, policymakers will need to balance various considerations. First, to the extent possible, policymakers will want to avoid contributing to market distortions by providing liquidity at terms that would be attractive in routine circumstances.  To an important degree, several of the programs were designed with terms that become less attractive to borrowers as market conditions improve.  The decline in usage of the foreign swap lines, the CPFF, the PDCF, and the TSLF reflects this factor. Second, in order to extend the 13(3) facilities, the Board must judge that conditions remain unusual and exigent, and the lending Reserve Bank must determine that adequate credit accommodations are not available from other banking institutions. The law does not define either of these terms, leaving considerable room for policymakers judgment.  Third, even though market conditions have improved notably over the past nine months, they arguably remain fragile and dependent on government support.  With 
the economy in a severe recession, credit losses on commercial real estate and other credits are likely to mount substantially, leading to erosion of bank capital and continued uncertainty about the health of individual banks.  In these circumstances, it seems likely that markets could remain quite jittery for some time.  In the absence of backup liquidity facilities, concerns about counterparty credit risk could remain substantial, and systemic risk could increase from its currently diminished level.  As is often the case, the period over year-end could also pose heightened risks. In view of these considerations, the staff has proposed that the Board and the FOMC extend a number of the Federal Reserves liquidity facilities to a point 
distinctly after year-endFebruary 1, 2010.  The staff also recommends, however, that certain other facilities be suspended, terminated, or modified. As shown in the first row of the table, the staff recommends that, given the continued strains on the banking system, the more liberal terms for primary credit the relatively low spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate and the availability of primary credit loans with terms of up to 90 daysbe maintained for the time being.  However, the staff believes that eventually, perhaps 
early next year, it will be appropriate to gradually increase that spread and shorten the maximum maturity. 
    As indicated in row 2, the staff recommends that the size of TAF auctions be reduced at this time from their current $150 billion to $125 billion.  Even that amount would be well above recent bid amounts, and the staff believes that auction sizes probably can gradually be reduced further later this year.  However, in view of the continued fragility of the banking system, the staff believes that it would not be prudent to announce at this time a fixed or even notional schedule for winding down the TAF. With regard to the longer-term status of the TAF, as noted in the right-hand column, the staff is currently leaning toward an eventual recommendation that in the steady state the TAF be maintained but at a low level, to maintain the operational readiness of the program for potential use in future periods of stress.  Coming back to the immediate proposal, an open issue is whether to accompany the reduction in TAF 
size with an increase in the minimum bid rate, say, to IOER plus 10 basis points.  Such a spread over the IOER rate would discourage institutions from using TAF as an 
essentially free means of securing a large liquidity buffer.  It would also move in the direction of pricing TAF at a penalty so that institutions would not rely on the facility when market sources of funds are available.  An argument against charging a penalty is that the program is an auction facility and not a standing facility.  Moreover, charging banks a penalty rate conceivably might stigmatize the facility. With regard to the foreign swap lines, row 3, the staff recommends extension through February 1. The major foreign central banks have priced their dollar provision at appreciable spreads over OIS, and usage has accordingly declined substantially as market conditions have improved.  Maintaining the swap lines into early February would help contribute to financial stability, while the penalty pricing should continue to discourage unnecessary reliance on foreign central banks dollar liquidity programs.  Consultation with our 14 central bank counterparties indicates that all are willing to extend the facilities, and some of them are eager to do so.  The 
staff plans to conduct a study beginning later this year on the desirability of maintaining some swap lines on a permanent basis. Moving to the dealer facilities, the staff proposes that authorization for the PDCF and the TSLF, rows 4 and 5, be extended to February 1. The PDCF is an important 
backstop for maintaining dealers liquidity during a period of potentially continued market stress.  However, to increase the Federal Reserves credit protection and to 
discourage unnecessary use of the facility, the staff proposes to increase the haircuts being charged on most types of investment-grade and noninvestment-grade collateral.  
For investment-grade collateral, these revisions will utilize the work recently done for discount window haircuts by the Subcommittee on Risk Management. With regard to the TSLF, the staff recommends that the program be extended through February 1, but it believes that operation of this program can now be scaled down significantly. In view of the improvements in the functioning of the repo markets for collateral eligible for open market operations and declining usage, the staff proposes to suspend both schedule 1 TSLF operations and auctions under the TSLF Options Program (TOP).  Operations under these programs could be resumed if warranted by market conditions, after consultation with the Board and FOMC if 
      possible. The repo market for non-OMO-eligible collateral has not improved to the same degree as that for schedule 1 collateral, and dealers continue to employ the program, albeit at a low and declining level.  Accordingly, the staff believes that schedule 2 auctions should continue, but that the amount and frequency of such auctions can be reduced to one auction of $75 billion every four weeks, and that the Desk could seek to scale back amounts further over time as market conditions allow. Lines 6 through 8 cover the facilities related to the commercial paper market and money market funds.  The staff believes that the situation with respect to money market mutual funds remains somewhat fragile.  The experience last fall 
demonstrated that money funds, which are close cousins of banks, are exposed to runs that can threaten the stability of the entire financial system.  Moreover, the Treasury believes that it does not have the statutory authority to extend its money fund guarantee program, which expires on September 18.  In these circumstances, the staff 
thinks that continued Federal Reserve liquidity support for money funds is warranted and recommends that two of the facilities be extended through early next year.  Unfortunately, various legal and practical constraints have resulted in somewhat awkward designs for these three facilities.   To be sure, the AMLF, line 6, has been an effective vehicle for helping to stabilize money market mutual funds.  However, it also has design features that make 
the program difficult to operate solely as a backup liquidity facility.  In particular, under the AMLF the Federal Reserve lends through depository institutions and other intermediaries rather than directly to money funds, and money funds are required to sell the ABCP to the depository institutions at amortized cost in order to limit the risk 
of breaking the buck. As a result of these features, simply raising the interest rate charged to the depository institution above the currently charged primary credit rate in an effort to make the facility less attractive would not work, or at least it would not work well: Depository institutions would only be willing to purchase ABCP with 
yields that are above the new interest rate, and there is not much eligible ABCP held by money funds with yields much above the primary credit rate.  On the other hand, 
altering the amortized cost requirement may also be problematic because it would increase the likelihood that funds using the AMLF would break the buck, thus reducing the effectiveness of the facility.  Accordingly, the staff has proposed a different approach to the AMLF: establishing redemption thresholds that would have to be exceeded before a money fund could use the program.  These redemption thresholds should ensure that the facility is used to help meet money funds liquidity needs and thus prevent runs, rather than purely as a credit backstop that money funds can use to shed paper at risk of downgrade. The CPFF, line 7, has facilitated continued issuance of commercial paper.  Moreover, it has been priced at rates that increasingly appear to represent penalties for most borrowers as market conditions have improved, and amounts outstanding 
have declined steadily. In order to help ensure that the commercial paper market is not disrupted between now and year-end, the staff proposes that the facility be extended through February 1 without change.  If market conditions continue to 
       
  improve but some borrowers keep relying on the CPFF, the New York Fed might counsel CPFF borrowers to seek alternative sources of financing. When it was designed, the MMIFF, line 8, was regarded as a useful liquidity backup for money funds. However, the decline in interest rates over the intervening period implies that money funds now hold very little paper that meets the requirements of the facility.  Therefore, the MMIFF is no longer likely to be an effective means of supporting money funds in the event of a run.  Moreover, money funds are concerned that usage of the facility would entail some stigma.  And, finally, the facility is costly to maintain.  As a result of these considerations, the staffrecommends that the authorization for the MMIFF not be extended. Currently, the TALF, line 9, is scheduled to expire at year-end.  Because the TALF does not provide short-term funding, it does not seem necessary to extend the 
TALF over year-end simply to align its expiration with the other facilities.  However, market participants have noted that it can take many months to assemble some of the deals to be financed by the TALF and, from that perspective, the year-end deadline might soon bind undesirably.  After further analysis of this issue, the staff might bring to the Board a separate proposal for a modest extension of the TALF. Finally, the authorization to lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, line 10, remains in effect.  With the Treasury now authorized to lend to the GSEs, the staff suggested that the Board consider rescinding this authority immediately.  However, the staff subsequently learned that the Treasury is concerned about possible adverse effects of a rescission of the authority at this time; a legislative proposal for restructuring the GSEs has not yet been put forward, and in these circumstances a rescission could prompt questions about the strength of government support for the GSEs and hence be destabilizing. The Board might consider it prudent to defer action on this recommendation for the time being. Drafts of Board and FOMC resolutions to implement these proposals were provided to you last week. That concludes the staff presentation.  We would be happy to respond to your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, and thanks again to the staff for the extraordinary amount of very useful work behind these presentations. We will go over specifically what resolutions will be needed to address the program recommendations.  But before we go into Q&A, I just want to ask Trish and Brian what youre asking for today. Youre asking for a vote, I understand, on the securities lending for GSEs.  The 
 other things that you mentioned, Trishlike the portfolio approach, tapering, hybrid ARMsare you just looking for input at this point, or are you looking for a decision? MS. MOSSER. For the hybrid ARMs, we are looking for input.  Its currently authorized, but wed like the Committees views.  For the portfolio approach, if it goes across asset classes, its going to require very substantial communication by the Committee, I believe, so thats really much more in the realm of the policy discussion, because it would be effectively making sizes flexible and fungible.  Regarding more flexibility within asset classes, again, under the current authorization, we have that authority, but wed be interested in the Committees input. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Good. Questions for the staff? President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, thank you.  Id like to start with Brian. First, in your presentation, you did not mentionor maybe I missed itthat the pace of corporate bond issuance picked up. The spreads have come downthat was well coveredbut tell us a little bit about the tone and the pace of the market.  Second, have rates themselves come down along with the narrowing of spreads? MR. SACK. The pace of corporate bond issuance has picked up.  May was a very heavy month, about $40 billion of issuance.  That strength seemed to spill into June.  Anecdotally were seeing this bond issuance used for a variety of purposes.  In part its being used to pay down bank loans and pay down CP. We are also seeing lots of holding of liquid assets.  This activity 
may just be some rotation or substitution on corporate balance sheets, but the pace of bond 
issuance certainly has picked up in response to the more favorable borrowing rates.  As your 
question suggested, certainly the collapse in spreads has been sufficient to outweigh the increase in Treasury yields. So, yes, corporate bond costs have declined. 
   MR. FISHER. Trish, our stated objective was to lower private credit rates and to increase credit availability, and further in your presentation you mentioned two specifics on that.  One was obviously mortgages and the other was corporate credits.  So we might conclude that we have been successful on the corporate credit front.  Is that a fair assessment, or is it too early to tell?  When you talk about lowering rates in your presentation, Trish, Im a little confused.  Our objective as I understood it was never to seek to lower rates on Treasuries deliberately.  It was to have an effect on the private credit markets.  Do I understand that correctly? MS. MOSSER. Yes, thats correct.  For corporate bonds, clearly, both yields and spreads have come way down, not just because of our actions presumably, but particularly because of the recovery in equity markets.  I guess we can take credit for some of that.  On the mortgage side, however, the spreads are or became effectively as low as we reasonably believe that we could push them with both the agency debt and the agency MBS program.  That means that additional purchases are going to have very large side effects; as we have discussed in the past, that makes us very concerned about exit and about market functioning and keeping the market healthy.  So at this stage our ability to lower private credit rates in the mortgage sphere is extremely limited unless our impact in the Treasury market directly is bigger. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I dont know if you want to stick to that subject with other questions, or may I go ahead and ask the other? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If you have other questions, go ahead. MR. FISHER. If I could quickly ask Jim and Spenceon the demand side, am I missing something here?  Wouldnt the simplest solution be to seek an increase in reserve requirements?  Whats the drawback?  The paper outlines the pros, but it wasnt clear to me what the cons are. 
  MR. CLOUSE. I will comment.  Spence may have some other points.  The existing regime for reserve requirements is very hard to rationalize.  Its based on the monetary policy implementation of the early 1980s and very much focused on transactions deposits.  I think that using that kind of creaky, old structure to generate a huge increase in required reserves would be a little awkward. And then there are the communications challenges associated with why we would be raising reserve requirements by a huge amount, even though they are being remuneratedit still might be awkward to explain.  Spence may have some further comments. MR. HILTON. I would also point out the inflexibility to change the level and the inflexibility in terms of the scope that it provides the reserve requirement structure in banks in managing their reserve accounts.  I would agree that, yes, it would work in the technical sense of giving us some leverage over short-term interest rates, but I would say that, with the authority that we have to pay interest on reserves, we could do a lot better and come up with something 
thats more flexible. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Vice Chairman has a two-hander. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think another issue is, of course, that the reserve requirements wouldnt fall precisely on those who have the excess reserves.  So youd be creating a lot of frictional cost by doing it that way. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. When we had reserve requirements on nonpersonal time deposits, it was kind of a nightmare administrativelythere were too many ways around it, and it was very hard to define what was inside and outside. Now, we dont have the tax on reserves that we used to 
have, but I still think it would be very, very cumbersome, and Im not sure what the advantage would be relative to just paying interest on term deposits. 
   MR. FISHER. So the answer is no. Thank you.  And then a question for Brian Madigan. When we talk about an increase in the primary credit spreadand I realize youre not recommending that currentlyhave you considered the effect it would have on smaller and regional banks?  At least through our discount window, we see some increased activity there, and were just a small part of the System.  So I wonder if weve taken that into account in that recommendation. MR. MADIGAN. Very much so, I would say. 
MR. FISHER. Im just wondering if weve thought about the politics of this, now when theyre a little bit sensitive about a new consumer protection agency and so on. MR. MADIGAN. Well, not so much the politics, but the economics.  Its not just the 11th District. I think there has been a fairly broad-based increase in terms of usage of primary credit by small institutions because they find the rate attractive.  The question is whether thats a good thing or a bad thing. I think from the point of view of central banking, our general perspective in redesigning the discount window facility some years ago was to set up the primary credit program as a Lombard facility that institutions wouldnt find attractive in routine circumstances but would turn to only as a backup.  Pricing the primary credit rate at a level that is consistent with that was one of the challenges in designing the primary credit program 
initially. It surely seems to be the case that as that spread narrows, exactly as you would expect, banks increasingly tend to use that as an ongoing source of funding, and that is, I think, the consideration that needs to be balanced. MR. FISHER. At the same time, we would be maintaining the TAF, but increasing the rate so that there would more of a penalty associated with it.  Did I understand that correctly? 
  MR. MADIGAN. Possibly increasing the penalty. I think that is open for discussion at this point. MR. FISHER. And who are the most active users of the TAF? MR. MADIGAN. Its used by some large domestic U.S. banks as well as by foreign branches. MR. FISHER. That would be one of my concernsthe optics of having a facility, which we, at least, have seen used by foreign branches, and maintaining it even though you might make it a little bit more difficult, while at the same time phasing out something that helps smaller and regional banks. I just wonder if there isnt a conflict there. MR. MADIGAN. My assumption is that the TAF would largely be wound down over roughly the same period of time.  The Federal Reserve might ultimately choose to maintain a TAF in the steady state, but at a very low level.  It wouldnt be a significant source of funding for large banks, foreign banks, or anybody. MR. FISHER. If I may just ask one more question, Mr. Chairman, of Brian, which is on the FX swaps. In your judgment, to what degree have the comparable ECB facilities and the IMF lending program substituted for or buttressed or deterred the effectiveness of our program?  In other words, we see less demand currently.  Is it because of those two facilities? Maybe your colleague to your right might have a view. MR. SHEETS. We have seen a dramatic decline in the outstandings under our swap facilitiesfrom about $250 billion at the last meeting to about $120 billion now; and just one other historical data point is that the peak was around $580 billion in December.  My sense is that this sharp reduction really is a reflection of healing in global dollar funding markets.  I think the policies that have been put in place with respect to IMF lending capacity have been important 
  in soothing nerves of investors globally, but I think thats more for the emerging market economies than, say, European markets, where the swap lines have been so important.  In addition, the ECB has some small swap lines with a number of European countries, but, again, I dont see them as playing significantly into the demand for dollar funding.  The bottom line is that healing in the dollar funding markets has been the key driver there. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, did you have a two-hander? 
MR. LACKER. Well, I was going to say that we tried increasing reserve requirements when excess reserve holdings were really large once in the late 1930s, and it didnt turn out so well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It did sop up the excess reserves, though.  [Laughter] President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. I have a question for Brian and Trish about your figure 5 on the large-scale asset purchases.  Its interesting what a straight line that is.  Over the last six months, obviously, the economic forecast has changedinterest rates have moved, financial conditions have changedand yet our program has been invariant to all of those changes.  So my first question is whether you think that youre restricted from being able to do anything other than a straight line program.  I thought you had more flexibility, but I want to get your sense of whether you have the flexibility currently to be able to vary the amount that youre purchasing or not.  I would say that, in talking to people in the financial community in Boston, one of the surprises was that the purchase program was invariant to the rise in interest rates that weve recently 
experienced, which certainly sent quite a message.  Did you debate whether you had the 
 flexibility to do anything to, in effect, resist some of that increase, both in the Treasuries and the mortgage-backed securities? MR. SACK. We have interpreted the directive as having some flexibility, but it is relatively limited, in that we varied the approach that we take to purchases and the pace of purchases to respond to problems with market functioning.  So we do vary the purchases to ensure that markets can continue to function and that were not causing too much strain in the markets.  One concrete example of this is that the approach to agency debt purchases has moved to a somewhat more flexible one that has reduced the pace and that raises the possibility of not getting all the way to the $200 billion because of what weve seen in the development of the functioning of that market.  So weve taken some limited flexibility in terms of responding to how markets function.   I think the more difficult issue is whether to exercise any flexibility in response to changes in market interest ratesthat is, beyond the reaction to market functioning, whether the Desk should respond and try to resist increases in, say, MBS rates or Treasury rates.  There I think our view is that we certainly dont have enough guidance from the Committee about the extent to which that responsiveness should be implemented or the yield levels at which purchases would ramp up.  We have not taken a dynamic market-responsive approach in that regard, and thats why this is one of the issues that Trish raised in her briefing, namely, whether the Committee would like to consider moving to a more flexible approach.  She raised the issue of doing that across asset classes, but she also raised the issue of doing that within an asset class to be more responsive to interest rates. MS. MOSSER. One follow-up remark to that:  On a daily basis in implementing the MBS purchase program, particularly during the refinancing wave, we were sensitive to supply 
  and spreads, and we would buy somewhat more on certain days and a little less on other days.  But, to be honest, that shows up as a very tiny bump in the overall pace of purchases.  As long as 
spreads were continuing to narrow overall, we did not make very large changes from week to week and month to month in quantities.  Even though there was some daily movement, the changes we made were small ones. In the Treasury program, quite honestly, given its relatively small size, we didnt feel that we had the flexibility nor that flexibility was necessarily a wise approach, since, frankly, it would 
not be credible, given chart 7the size of it is just too small to have an appreciable effect on the level of yields. When we were being flexible in agency MBS, it tended to be in response to spreads more than to the level of yields. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, you had a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, just very quickly. On the agency MBS, I think there is some notion that the rate of purchases will somehow be loosely linked to the amount of originations and the effect on spreads.  So we are a little bit ahead of schedule in terms of doing the $1.25 trillion, but thats also because originations were very, very strong, and theyll 
probably be weaker in the second half of the year.  So the purchases will probably slow down a little bit. To your point, President Rosengren, it would be really hard to accelerate purchases in response to a backup in yields, because that would then run into the conflict of having only so much authority over such-and-such a time period.  I mean, talk about potentially having severe cliff effects: Im going to buy more as rates go up?  What happens if rates go up more? Then Im going to buy more, and then Im also going to be out of ammunition.  I think actually putting 
 that in practice without the FOMC sort of dynamically altering the limits of how much the Desk could do would, I think, be very, very difficult. MR. ROSENGREN. Well, we could always reload.  So there is an option. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right, but the Desk does not want to make a presumption that youre necessarily going to reload, and its probably inappropriate for the Desk to make that presumption.  So I think its a pretty complicated thing to do in practice. MR. ROSENGREN. We do have a long tradition of leaning against the wind, and this program seems not to be very interested in leaning against the wind.  I thought you had enough flexibility to do that. Personally I would hope that you would have the flexibility to do that and that we might do a little bit more of it. In terms of your hybrid, I think its a very good proposal.  You did note its a very small part of the market, and, looking at data from McDash confirms that its an extremely small part of the market.  That is a part of the market where, if we wanted to push rates down more aggressively, we could do so with relatively low costs.  It seems that $1 trillion in mortgages is a lot to support market functioning.  So I actually have a broader goal than market functioning, which is to get the cost of housing down for people who might want to purchase houses. If were worried about market functioning in the 15- and 30-year area, it does seem that the 5- and 7-year area is one where theres virtually no activity now; earlier this decade you 
could get a 7-year ARM for 4 percent, no points, no closing costs.  We havent hit anything close to that in this period.  Given where the economy is, I dont quite understand why those ARMs havent come down and why theyre not priced more favorably.  It may be reputational effects from the subprime market.  There might be a reason to stay away from 3-year ARMs, because the 3-27 has some connotations.  The 5-year and 7-year ARMs have the advantage of 
  being longer term while still meeting some of our balance sheet issues.  So you might want to give some thought to the politics of the choice between 3-year and 5- or 7-year.  But it would seem with the 5- or 7-year, we could lean against the wind and actually do morewe could actually try to push the rate low enough so that, if the 30-year mortgage were very high because of what was happening in the Treasuries, it would actually encourage housing purchases in that market without changing the magnitude of what youre doing.  So I would like you to have a lot more flexibility to do that and possibly to push those rates down more aggressively than weve 
been willing to do with the 15- and 30-year rates. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Lets stay in question mode for a while, and then well have an opportunity for free discussion. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I have a couple of things I want to ask about.  First, let me compliment the staff on providing us with a special abundance of interesting analytical reading over the weekend. Obviously a lot of work and thought went into it.  Let me first check something and then ask a question. In the projections of the balance sheet, there are two scenarios, but your 
projections for the use of credit facilities and liquidity facilities are the same in both.  Am I correct about that? MR. CARPENTER. Yes. The difference between the two is not very big, partly because the liquidity and credit facilities are starting to wind down fairly quickly now over the next year or so. So we didnt see that much reason to make significantly different assumptions about them.  MR. LACKER. So you made the same assumptions? 
MR. CARPENTER. Thats right. MR. LACKER. I was thinking about it a different way, and I wanted to get your thoughts on this. The basic scheme here is, you write down our asset purchases, and then 
 program by program you have a sense of what you are going to project for usage, and then you add those up, and then you subtract currency, and you get reserves, right? In the old days we did it the other way, right?  We used to think that if we drained reserves, for example, that would force banks to the window to borrow. So we used to think that you would take our assets, subtract currency, and there would be a certain demand for reserves, and the residual would be met by borrowing.  So you guys have turned it around. MR. CARPENTER. I would slightly prefer to think of it as that you guys have turned it around. [Laughter] MR. LACKER. This is the economics of the market.  I mean, were just changing policy here, right?  Let me explain why Im thinking about it.  We monitor pretty closely the institution that leads your league table for holdings, and we monitor the liquidity management function particularly closely. They have $150 billion in balances with us.  They also hold a sizable portfolio$70 or $80 billionin general collateral Treasuries and agency MBS.  They view those two as really close substitutes as liquid assets.  By the way, I was a little puzzled that in one of the papers that talked about banks and lending, liquid assets never made an appearance and was sort of the residual, I guess. The institution is undergoing a review now. Theyre rethinking.  What we hear is that theyre thinking of reducing their Fed balance now and increasing their holdings of agency MBS and Treasuries in order to get a higher yield.  That suggests a demand for reserves thats determined by the relative yields of things.  Another observation I had is that over the last couple of months, weve ramped up asset purchases, liquidity programs have come in below expectations, and reserve holdings seem to have been sort of flat, all of which is kind of striking and also has the flavor of this other direction that I talked about.  Do you see what Im saying? 
   MR. CARPENTER. I do. The logic underlying it, such as it was, was that the use of the facilities by depository institutions is by and large determined by economic and financial market conditions; that is, while financial markets are under strain, depository institutions will continue to borrow and other institutions will continue to borrow, and when things get better, theyll borrow less. Weve thought of that aspect of it as being roughly independent, and, for most cases, that seems to be borne out by the anecdotal information we get from markets. The particular institution youre talking about, I agree, is quite different from a lot of the other institutions. That bank has a very large amount of reserve balances that it owns outright in some sense.  In addition, its also borrowing a reasonably large amount from the Federal Reserve. To me, that says that its choosing, as I think you characterized it accurately, its level 
of reserve balances as a specific targetthis is how much it wants to hold, and it has some 
latitude to go up or down. Our reading on the rest of the banking systemthe banking system in the aggregateis not quite that way. The bulk of the activity in lending facilities involves not depository institutions but other institutions.  Their borrowing through the commercial paper funding facility, for example, shows up as a quantity of reserve balances, but its not a depository institution that has done that borrowing. If we wanted to get that set of reserve balances out of the banking system, theres not a bank that would intentionally repay that borrowing to reduce their reserve holdingsits the CP issuer thats doing it.  So, in that sense, weve separated most of the borrowing as a response to financial market conditions and economic conditions in 
constructing the reserve balances. MR. LACKER. In some of these programs, like the CPFF, counterparties are outside the banking system, but in the TAF, the primary credit facility, and to some extent the foreign 
     currency swap lines, those are all inside now.  Wouldnt you think that how much a bank wants to borrow is determined in part by how much reserves they want to hold?  Now, to some extent, its an unfair question. We all recognize that in reality its a simultaneous thinggiven the yields they see, they decide how much reserves to hold, and given their funding opportunities, they decide where to get the funds. But it seems plausible to me that they choose reserves, we buy assets, and that results in inflow of reserves to them; they dont need to borrow them from anybody, theyve got somebody else funding them essentially, and so they run off the borrowings. The reason I ask is that in the analytics you have shown us about that, you havent shown us anything about this link through reserves. When weve had this big discussion for several months now about the effect of these large-scale asset purchases, it has all been sort of microeconomic, financial market by financial market.  If this picture Im drawing is right, then I wonder if theres a channel thats missing from your analysis.  For example, for Bank of America to hold more reserves, that means theyd have to want to hold less Treasuries and MBS, which means the yields on those would have to go down.  So we could be buying peanuts and Crackerjacks, and it would drive yields down.  Do you see what I am saying? MR. MADIGAN. President Lacker, I think we subscribe to pretty much all of the points youve made, but our ability to quantify the elasticities that youre talking about, I think, is essentially nil. This is a good area for research and further thought, but this is what we could do in the limited time we had available. MR. LACKER. I understand. Well, the reason I ask about this is that the focus is all supposed to be about exit strategy.  Weve come through SCAP, and financial market conditions seem to be on the mend.  Admittedly theres a lot of downside risk and a lot of uncertaintyis 
  the economy going to find its footing?but its also conceivable that something like the Greenbook forecast comes about later this year and we get positive growth.  And its conceivable that banks ability to raise equity improvesthis was left out of your analysis; you took equity as sort of an exogenous parameter.  But if banks find that, because of an increase in economic growth, there are some borrowers that they are interested in lending to, they could ramp up lending and expand equity. If we continue to buy assets and their need for funding collapses, so that the borrowing through our facilities collapses, we could get to the point where theyre holding all the reserves they want. Then theres sort of a discrete change, where were pushing reserves up in a way that cant be absorbed by changes in their borrowing.  So the concern I have is the possibility that our programs could get very stimulative very quickly.  Thats why Im 
thinking about what the effect would be if they werent borrowing anything but we kept pumping reserves out there by buying assets.  Do you see what I am saying? Is that a possibility? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Dont we have the ability to affect the rate at which people can borrow through the interest on excess reserves?  If that really became a problem, we would be able to affect that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If that happened, the low short-term rates would be transmitted to longer-term rates, and you would see a decline in rates across the board, which would, of course, be stimulative.  But presumably the economy doesnt respond immediately, and wed be able to offset that by interest rate policy. MR. LACKER. Would we want to add reserves at $100 billion a month or so and raise the interest rate on reserves at the same time? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No. I assume that if we came to an exit point and started raising rates, we would no longer be buying assets. 
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. All of the asset purchase programs are up to.  They do depend on the conditions at the time.  MR. LACKER. Well, I just worry.  Banking is sort of sitting there with a certain amount of borrowers. Im worried about a flip back to the classic model in which we pump in reserves and they lend it, and its stimulative. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The other problem is that theyre still balance sheet constrained in terms of the amount of capital they have relative to their assets.  You can see that in a wide variety of areas; for example, the spread of jumbo mortgages relative to conforming mortgages is still very elevated. MR. LACKER. But presumably their ability to access equity markets is going to improve. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We hope were successful in this regard.  President Hoenig has a two-hander. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, and this is a question for you, just to clarify.  I understand where Jeff is coming from, but when I read these papers and I listen to these presentations, I think we have more than an exit strategy discussion going on here.  Eric has kind of drifted onto one discussion about managing rates.  Another is around managing the portfoliohow we adjust. Then there is the exit strategy, which has two dimensions, but I think we are only discussing one. The first dimension is the traditional monetary one of how you get the fed funds rate up. The second is around large-scale asset purchases, which were not really talking about today, since we still have this line showing our holdings going up and the only thing is how we are going to adjust the line going up, but that is not an exit strategy.  That is about how we are going to manage going up that line; that is the concern, I think. 
  So I wonder if it would help to split these up when we are talking.  I mean part of this is about managing the rate, which is different than exit strategy, and it would help clarify when we get into the discussion part of the meeting to say which one we are going to focus on first.  Right now I think we are focusing on all three intermittently here and back and forth, and I think that will cause maybe more confusion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, were you finished? MR. LACKER. I had two smaller things to ask about.  One had to do with MBS spreads. This past intermeeting period is one of those episodes where convexity-related hedging, that is, selling in the Treasury market, was a widespread feature of commentary, and it has happened 
many times before in the last decade or so.  The picture you get, and let me check this, is that 
there are a lot of holders of mortgage-backed securities who hold a lot of Treasuries.  So theyre active in the Treasury market and theyre active in the MBS market. Is that a good picture, a fair picture? MS. MOSSER. They may have Treasury securities that they could sell.  They also have the ability to short them.  They can also do similar portfolio adjustments in the swaps market, which, through follow-on effects, through other trading mechanisms, will affect Treasury yields.  So they can pay fixed on swaps. MR. LACKER. So this is broadly speaking a set of financial market participants very active in MBS markets and very active in Treasuries as well.  They would seem to have the ability to look at the spread and make decisions at the margin about buying and selling Treasuries or MBS based on their view of the proper level of the spread or where the spread is headed, right? 
  MS. MOSSER. Well, the convexity hedging phenomenon, particularly in the current episode, was actually more concentrated in servicers and not so much in MBS investors themselves, although Im sure there were a few of those that were selling convexity.  Servicing portfolios have even more convexity than mortgages, so, dollar for dollar, it doesnt take a big change in their duration to cause someone who is hedging to sell either a lot of swaps or a lot of Treasuries. One reason for the speed is that there are many servicers, they have really, really similar portfolios, and they all go in on the same day or two and conduct the same sorts of trades in the same direction. MR. LACKER. Im less interested in convexity-related trading per se than the linkages between the MBS and the Treasury markets.  There are a lot of players taking a position on the spread, and Im wondering what we know that they dont know about where the spread should be. So, analytically, on what basis would we make a judgment that the spread is too low or too high? MS. MOSSER. Two things. We used history. MR. LACKER. This is history they can see, right? MS. MOSSER. But we used the long history of spreads to Treasuries to make a judgment about how narrow they were.  We also considered whether there was anyone else who was buying for investment purposes, in other words, anyone else who was willing to come in and actually purchase them to hold besides us.  If we were the only long-term purchaser, we took that as a signal that we had lowered spreads to the point that they were not attractive to other investors.  That was the place that we were before the convexity hedging episode, and its one of the reasons that we were already beginning to slow down. 
  MR. LACKER. A related question: One of the memos was pretty eloquent about the need for greater clarity and better communication about our strategy.  Is there any chance that providing the Desk with more flexibility about the composition of our asset purchases could diminish rather than enhance market understanding of our strategy? MS. MOSSER. I believe that flexibility could be a very successful strategy, but it would need substantially more clarity about the Committees views and literally its reaction function, for lack of a better term, which may be very difficult to do, given how far out we are in uncharted territory. MR. LACKER. One final question about the interest rate on reserves and the reserve management tools:  Does the staff think its at all likely that the effective funds rate would not be brought up pretty much in tandem if we raised the interest rate on reserves under current arrangements? MR. CLOUSE. I think theres an excellent chance that it would rise.  We just dont know whether it would go up by an 80 percent factor or a 90 percent factorthat remains to be seen. So I think its very prudent to examine all of these other tools.  We just really are in uncharted territory, especially with hundreds of billions of dollars in reserve balances outstanding. MR. LACKER. Have you thought about whether we care about the federal funds rate per se, that is, if the interest rate on reserves is more relevant than the weighted average you calculate every day? MR. HILTON. I think its a good question. What does the rate represent?  What does the gap represent?  Does it represent a rent that banks are extracting, or does it represent their 
  own spread aligned with their borrowing rates and their lending rates?  I think thats a legitimate question, and in my mind its an open one. MR. MADIGAN. The experience last fall, though, gives you some reason to think that the fed funds rate is relevant. The fact that the substantial spread between the interest rate on excess reserves and the fed funds rate seems to be reflected in other market interest rates like LIBOR, CP, and so on, suggests that its not solely the IOER rate thats the relevant margin. MR. LACKER. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions.  On this strategy for dealing with the large-scale asset purchases, what are other central banks doing? I notice the Bank of Japan is doing just a certain amount per month.  And the Bank of England just did what we didthey announced a total. But are they varying within that total?  Are they exercising flexibility or is the process pretty mechanical?  Are there any lessons for us from what theyre doing? MS. MOSSER. Its our understanding that its fairly mechanical.  Now, a couple of times the Bank of England has bought so much that they were afraid that they were reducing liquidity in the market, and they have slowed down again from a market functioning standpoint. MR. KOHN. Sort of like what we have done with the MBS. 
MR. MOSSER. Yes. But they absolutely are much more focused on a reserves or a money target than the SOMA purchases have been. MR. SHEETS. The Bank of England has moved at a pretty regular pace of about 25 billion a month.  One place where I think they do have a little bit of flexibility that they have chosen not to utilize is in the composition of the purchases; they have the gilts approved, but they 
      could also buy corporates and commercial paper, yet the vast majority of their purchases have been in the gilts. MR. KOHN. Other central banks have found it difficult, as have we, to specify the reaction function, I suspect. Brian, you mentioned that Treasury supply is driving up Treasury rates, but my impression is there has been no news on Treasury supply.  Its a very common thing to hear, but I wondered. MR. SACK. I agree. I think for this intermeeting period, most estimates of borrowing needs of the Treasury didnt rise.  So I would say thats more of a backdrop condition, not the main driver of the rising yields over this intermeeting period.  But its certainly a very important factor over a broader time period. MR. KOHN. And finally for Seth, are there any consequences of not covering our expenses?  Can we pay dividends?  Do we continue to pay salaries? [Laughter] For the Governors we can do that out of spare changethe vending machine receipts will pay the Governors salariesbut what about for the rest of you? MR. SACK. If youre going to go down that road, you should make the salaries responsive to the upside as well. [Laughter] MR. CARPENTER. That sounds like a profit-sharing plan for the Fed employees.  The accounting treatment is that once theres no net income after paying dividends and that sort of thing, we stop remitting money to the Treasury.  What happens if we cant even make the 
dividend payments to the member banks?  The Reserve Banks would not pay their dividends to the member banks, but they would have to make that up in subsequent years. MR. KOHN. Its cumulative. 
    MR. CARPENTER. Its cumulative, exactly.   MR. KOHN. Are they forced not to pay dividends, or is that a choice? MR. CARPENTER. My recollection is that its a choice, and part of it comes from Board direction to the Reserve Banks. Then the question becomes how long this goes on; it ends up accumulating through time, and then in subsequent years it just takes that much longer before 
we start getting back to normal.  We have to save up earnings.  The accounting for it is still being evaluated.  Theres some view that some of the remittances that have already been paid to the 
Treasury could be recouped by booking an asset thats essentially a prepayment, and then that might be able to be pushed back an extra year; the accountants in the System are working on the actual treatment of that. MR. KOHN. If we get into this situation, theres nothing mechanical about it that would impinge on our independence?  We could continue to meet our responsibilities? President Bullard and I were at a conference where a lot of academics were worried, I think, that if we didnt meet our expenses, something awful would happen.  Something awful may happen, but-- MR. BULLARD. Just to follow up on that, are there examples of foreign central banks that have been in a position like this? MR. SHEETS. There have been a number, I think, that have had to turn to their treasuries to be recapitalized.  I dont have a lot of details about those experiences at my fingertips, but its something that has happened before, and there are some precedents we could look into. MR. BULLARD. My sense of this, then, is that you are at the mercy of the Treasury.  If theyre merciful, then they recapitalize you.  
   MR. KOHN. Well, no.  What I was getting at was that I didnt think you were at the mercy of the Treasury, but rather that it was our choice. MR. BULLARD. Thats not the foreign experience. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the dividends are one buffer.  Beyond the dividends, presumably, and the capital, then you would be at the mercy, I would imagine. MR. MADIGAN. I dont think thats clear.  I mean, theres nothing that says necessarily that a central bank cant operate with negative capital. MR. SHEETS. And I would bet that we could also find some examples of foreign central banks that did have negative capital. You know, it can be a little uncomfortable.  For the cases that I can think of, they have eventually gone to their treasuries to seek recapitalization, but I think theres a range of experiences out there with this that we can look at. MR. PLOSSER. Theres nothing that says they cant operate, but do you think the political environment is such that something dramatic might happen in response to that, given what has gone on in this episode?  I would think that would be the bigger risk, not the accounting treatment.  Its the political force. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is not going to happen in the intermeeting period.  Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I hope not.  The issue from my perspective is that its political. In other words, the day that you find out that youre no longer remitting positive balances to the Treasury, theres a nice, juicy news story, and then they go evaluate:  Why did this come about?  Because the Fed engaged in these large-scale asset programs and because of assetliability mismatch.  Was that prudent for the Federal Reserve to do?   
       MR. CARPENTER. Just to clarify a bit, what we sidestepped in the analysis was the fact that the remittances are actually made currently by individual Reserve Banks, and it is very, very common for an individual Reserve Bank not to have sufficient capital to equate with surplus and to make a remittance to the Treasury.  Over the past decade or so, its been something like 40 weeks per year that at least one Reserve Bank hasnt made a remittance to the Treasury.  So its not as though this is something that is completely unprecedented for the Federal Reserve.  What would be very different here is that it would happen for the Federal Reserve System as a whole. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans, do you have a two-hander on this? MR. EVANS. Well, I had a question that was related to Governor Kohns question on this. Do we have a particular attitude towards mark-to-market losses, that is, capital losses, versus having our net income go to zero?  That was one of the more striking graphs, a very extreme example.  I would have thought that there would be an accounting entry that would allow us to continue to fund whatever we needed to do, but the political issue seems to be an important one.  It would be well known along the way, so that people would see it coming, but some of these tools would involve capital losses right away.  Would that raise a similar red flag in terms of our balance sheet?  Would we be worried about that? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think its a consideration.  First of all, you wouldnt want to be selling huge amounts.  Second, you probably could mix different assets of different vintages and do things of that sort. But I think it is a consideration that we should pay attention to. MR. EVANS. My question was really: Do any of the reserve management tools have better attributes than others? 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Most of themlike reverse repurchases, things that dont involve actually selling the assets, but rather involve financing them in different waysdont have the capital loss component. MR. EVANS. We will lose money on them, though, right?  Because presumably the interest rate we have to pay on the repo is going to be higher than the income that its earning. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, thats the point.  If it gets to 8 percent, then were in a loss position. MR. EVANS. Yes, right, right. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn, were you finished? 
MR. KOHN. Im finished. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you. Ive got a couple of questions.  The first one is on the exit strategy, and the second one is a little more tangential.  With regard to the expiration dates for these liquidity facilities, if we extend them to February 1, 2010, what kind of commitment and 
communication are you thinking about so that they actually do end then? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Maybe I could intervene.  There would be a press release Thursday, which weve been working on, and we can show you a draft.  Here are the proposed final sentences of the introduction: The Board and the FOMC will continue to monitor closely the condition of financial markets and the need for and effectiveness of the Federal Reserves 
special liquidity facilities and arrangements.  Should the recent improvements in market conditions continue, the Board and the FOMC currently anticipate that a number of these facilities may not need to be extended beyond February 1.  However, if financial stresses do not moderate as expected, the Board and the FOMC are prepared to extend the terms of some or all 
     of the facilities as needed to promote financial stability and economic growth.  The public will receive timely notice of planned extensions, discontinuations, or modifications of Federal Reserve programs.  Thats the kind of language that we were trying to communicatenot too definitive, but clearly raising the possibility there wont be any further renewals. MR. STERN. Okay. The second question is about the TALF and the quantities.  I gather we now think TALF volumes might go to $175 billion whereas heretofore we were up around $500 billion, and I think earlier we even had a larger number.  Is all of that consistent with the objectives of this program?  Where is this coming from? MR. NELSON. I think partly its experience as we work with the program.  Its an awareness that as ABS markets improve, were not going to need as much TALF activity to support them. Its becoming consistent with what were seeing in CMBS markets.  Right now the numbers were putting down for TALF 2.0 peak at $50 billion, which is about what we think is going to be needed for CMBS, and with TALF 1.0 itsI forget the numbers that we actually put downbut its a more modest $125 billion, which is where we see activity at its current pace ending in the first quarter.  So its consistent with the policy objectives.  Its just accumulated experience. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Just quickly, I want to go back to Governor Kohns original question on the accounting. In this document there is a discussion about investments held in consolidated variable-interest entities, with a conservative assumption that we could take a $5 billion hit and then no more losses after that, even if interest rates went up pretty significantly.  Is that a conservative assumption?  That is, if interest rates went up significantly, wouldnt you expect more losses out of that? 
  MR. CARPENTER. It has been the stated policy that its expected that these assets will be managed through time to recover everything, so in that sense the official view is that there will be no losses.  Given that, the estimate is conservativeits taking on more losses than was originally expected by the policy itself. The other part thats not obvious to me is the effect if, for example, interest rates rose.  If that increasing rate was because the economy as a whole was getting better and financial markets were healing and everyone thought the outlook was very, very rosy, then the underlying value of some of those assets may no longer be distressed.  Some of the write-downs are because of the strains in financial markets.  You could imagine cases where some of those assets increase in value because the economy is turning around and the outlook is brighter, and its exactly those sorts of multivalent influences that caused us to throw up our hands somewhat and take the 
cowards way out. MR. HOENIG. Went to neutral.  Okay. The second question is also related to the earlier discussion. In some of the accounting that Ive seen and what I believe I saw discussed in here 
was the establishment of a prepaid account to the Treasury to go back and, therefore, bring your surplus up so you could continue to pay your dividends and so forth.  Are those only allowed under special circumstances, or would those be allowed in any kind of a loss circumstance, so 
they would enable us to continue to pay dividends? MR. CARPENTER. Right now whats envisioned is the case where losses were sufficiently large that capital would go negative. What has been written into Reserve Bank accounting policy is the ability to create a prepaid asset for things that have happened year to date. They are currently working on ways of going back not just year to date, but the prior year 
    as well, so that would be used in the event of losses where you wouldnt have enough retained earnings to equate surplus with capital paid in. MR. HOENIG. That would address part of Governor Kohns concerns about continuing to pay for operating expenses and continuing to pay dividends. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few questions. Some of them have been touched on already, but let me just see if I can get some clarifications.  One question is for Brian, and its related to your conversation with Eric about SOMA lending of agency debt and the liquidity in the market.  You said that one of your reactions so far has been that you have kind of slowed down the purchases. In fact, if youre worried about the liquidity of that market and were soaking up all of the liquidity, whats wrong with another option, namely, to stop buying?  Why create a program where were buying them and lending them back out again? Why not just not buy them in the first place and let the liquidity of the market deepen as we move forward?  Is there something wrong with that strategy? MR. SACK. Well, I think its quite possible that we will exercise the up to part of the mandate regardless of whether were lending the agency securities or not.  I think the desire to lend the agency securities is in response to concerns about market function, which would be there whether the program ended at $100 billion or $150 billion or $200 billion.  In either case, SOMA holdings are going to be a sizable portion of the benchmark GSE market, and, as I said, were already hearing reports from the market about concerns about shorting and not enough floating supply of these issues. MR. PLOSSER. Thats because we are buying them, right? 
   MR. SACK. Thats because we are buying them, right.  Its a matter of degree.  So I agree. If you dont get to $200 billion, you lessen the problem, but I think we would pursue the authority to lend our agency holdings regardless of whether we thought the program was going to end before $200 billion or get all the way to $200 billion.  Were already seeing these strains.  We think making these holdings available to the market makes sense in terms of supporting market functioning, treating these assets the way we treat other SOMA holdings, and, as I said, posing little risk to the Federal Reserve. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is about making sure that you can deliver a specific issue. It doesnt affect reserves or the stance of monetary policy, I dont think. MR. PLOSSER. No, I was thinking purely in terms of the liquidity of the market, which I thought you were concerned about.  If we are heavily into buying in these markets and taking those assets out of the market, and there are some liquidity problems for some of these issues, then all were doing is turning around and lending them back out again to help liquidity.  It seems like were giving with one hand and taking away with the other.  Im just trying to 
understand a little bit about it. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You might not know ex ante which things are going to have liquidity issues in the future. MR. PLOSSER. Im not necessarily opposed to the program. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Having a lending program allows you to accommodate those shortages that might occur ex post. MR. PLOSSER. Another question. On the winding down of some of the liquidity procedures, there are some specific recommendations that are made about the TAF auctions and some others about mixtures of extending the dates, cutting back auction sizes, and/or changing 
  prices in some form.  Im curious about how the staff thinks about the right mixture of controlling prices versus quantities, the tradeoffs.  I mean, October is still what, five months away. In thinking about when is the right time if we thought we wanted to extend, how much in advance do we need to do that?  Is there an option of continuing to sort of just proceed with gradually ramping up prices or costs of these programs to encourage the users to wean themselves off of this and go back to the market? Then we would not make the decision to extend maybe forI dont knowa little longer or wait a little while to see whether or not we can wean these players off and into the market.  So thinking about the mix of both price and 
quantity controls, I guess I was looking for some insight as to how do you pick between those two and the tradeoff versus extensions or not. MR. MADIGAN. I think it is, unfortunately, a fairly complicated situation, so its difficult to give a simple answer to your question.  For one thing, we have both standing facilities and auction facilities, and theyre really very different in terms of their philosophy and what you might think their purpose is and how to unwind them.  An auction facility, pretty much by construction, can be unwound primarily just by reducing the amounts offered, whereas to make a standing facility less attractive, obviously youd increase the interest rates or otherwise make the terms less attractive.  To some degree what weve proposed here has included elements of both of thosefor instance, making the terms less attractive in the case of the AMLF by requiring the redemption threshold, and reducing the auction amounts in the case of the TAF.  Theyre just two very different facilities that require different approaches.  As we noted in the memo, its not really feasible to scale back the AMLF by raising the interest rate on that particular program. On the timing, thats a difficult question.  I think one consideration is that, as we get closer to the termination dates of programs, market participants will be deciding whether or not 
   to lend to particular counterparties, depending on whether that counterparty is going to have the option of turning to the Federal Reserve to repay the investor or the lender. That argues at least for a significant lead time in notifying the market as to when these facilities are likely to go away. MR. PLOSSER. What I was thinking about was the pace.  Take the TAF, for example the recommendation is to cut from $150 billion to $125 billion, and maybe or maybe not to raise the minimum bid rate.  Why dont we cut to $100 billion immediately?  Its undersubscribed by a substantial amount. Why not move the minimum bid to something closer to the interest rate on excess reserves rather than making it so far below it that were subsidizing, at least in the current environment.  Were sort of mixing those two things up, trying to figure out what the right balance and strategy are, or how aggressive one wants to be in this process. MR. MADIGAN. Right. It is very much a matter of judgment, I think, including how aggressive you think is appropriate at this point, given circumstances that arguably remain very fragile, with the banking system still under a lot of strain. MR. PLOSSER. Well, I worry particularly about the TAFits so dominated by a couple of banks, and I dont want to confuse supporting a couple of banks with the broader purpose of sort of what these bank programs might be doing. I wanted to make a couple of other pointsand Jeff made both of these in a different form.  One is the communication issue.  If you provide more flexibility to the Desk to do some of this stuff, communication is going to be really, really, really difficult, and we may be accused of being less transparent rather than more transparent about that.  So I think thats going to be a very tough task. MS. MOSSER. Absolutely. 
   MR. PLOSSER. The other point is on the interest on excess reserves.  Its certainly true that theres a possibility that as the markets and the economy begin to recover, well have a lot of excess reserves sitting out there. And the opportunity cost to banks may be, Okay, when can I make a good business loan at 8 percent or 7 percent?  And they view the risk tradeoffs for that as the right ones. We may be faced with a situation, even if we thought interest on excess reserves worked perfectly, where we would have to raise the IOER very aggressively to choke off that massive amount of liquidity that may be just sort of running out into the marketplace.  If interest on excess reserves isnt working as wed like to see it work, then we are going to have to combine that with some other mechanism for draining those excess reserves.  The question is: 
Whats the relevant interest rate thats going to guide us in some of those moves? And I think thats very difficult to sort out, even with the tremendous job the staff has donetheres a lot of forest and a lot of weeds here in trying to sort through the details.  But I do think its important 
that we try to make sure that if Plan A doesnt work, we have a Plan B.  That is, we need to make sure that if IOER doesnt work as we hoped it would, we have other mechanisms to drain the reserves.  But we may have to do that at a very rapid pace, which may mean some of these 
mechanisms that you suggest may operate more quickly and are more easily implemented than others, and that might be a consideration that we have to think about. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser, I think there are two mechanisms that prevent this thing that youre worried about from happening overnight. MR. PLOSSER. I dont think overnight, but it may be a period of months. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The first one is that, assuming that we have the power to raise interest rates, which is what this whole discussion is about, then rates on longer-term securities will reflect the expected path of future policy rates and, therefore, will not go to zero.  
 So to the extent that theres an expectation over the next three years the Fed will be raising rates at a reasonable pace, that will limit the amount that the supply price of credit can fall. Thats the first point. And then, the second point is, of course, that, although financial markets move quickly, all of our models tell us that the economy itself moves somewhat more slowly.  With a large output gap, its going to take some time certainly for the economy to reach its full potential.  And I understand all of the issues with the output gap, and so on, but I dont want to leave the impression that this is something thats going to require a turnaround within a matter of weeks.  I just dont think thats a real concern.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, Id like to compliment everyone on the new audio system, although it picks up the Blackberry noise pretty well, too.  On the reserve management tools, Ive read your speeches and heard you describe them with quite a lot of energy. Were looking at quite a number of tools, and yet I wonder how different they are in terms of their ability to achieve what we want.  What I have in mind is that the interest on reserves tool by itselfespecially with the elements that are designed to help the GSEs somehow earn interest on their reservesseems powerful enough, so that that should work.  But what if, for some reason, it doesnt work?  Maybe somebody could describe the elements of the other markets that were expecting to take advantage of that somehow would provide an independent channel that would help out. For example, would the reverse repo market really work very well in an environment where the banks seem not to be arbitraging the interest on reserves? MR. HILTON. If we are seeing a gap between the rate that banks are earning on excess reserves and what they are paying, I think that I would approach that situation as really an arbitrage opportunity for us. If were talking about reverse repos as the tool, as long as we have the collateral and we can basically get to those depositors directly or even indirectly, then that 
  would be the mechanism that we would use to grow the reverse repo market.  But in contemplating the potential scale for the operations, I dont think we should believe that we are necessarily limited by measures we currently have of the size of that market.  Rather, its a matter of how many reserves we want to drain and who it is that is earning a rate from the banks thats well below the interest on excess reserves and therefore would be interested in lending to us at a slightly higher rate. So thats how we would simultaneously lift rates and manage down the size of the banks balance sheets, that is, bring down excess reserves and some of their liabilities. MR. EVANS. As I was thinking about this, it seemed that one attractive feature is that the money market mutual funds would be potential customers here.   MR. HILTON. We have thought of them.  We havent approached them about it.  But in terms of thinking of a pool of liquidity, that might fit the kind of description I provided, yes. MR. EVANS. Okay. So theres no obvious reason to think that, when the banks are not taking up these arbitrage opportunities, theres some underlying feature that also would make the money market mutual funds somehow reluctant? MR. HILTON. I dont believe so. MR. EVANS. Well, theyre not designed to.  Im just trying to think in terms of the risks that we might face. MR. CARPENTER. One extra bit of data that might help with that specific question is that, even in the past couple of days, and in the past months, when the effective federal funds rate has been right at the top of the zero to 25 basis point bandor we would just say right up against 
the rate on excessit has been associated with the repo rate being above the excess rate, that is, at 27, 28, 29 basis points. And weve been hearing that that has been causing some of this 
   shifting of funds that might have been lent unsecured into the secured funding markets.  So I think that is very much in line with Spences point about the repo market being a way for us to take care of some of that.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to see if I have this right about exit strategies. And I have to say Brian Madigans memo here on liquidity facilities is a masterpiece of clarity, so thank you for that, Brian. Its super clear what were going to do and what were thinking about with each program, why were thinking about it, why were thinking of the different options.  And when I look at large-scale asset purchases, its much less about exiting, and maybe its a little bit about coping.  But I expected to see more about what we could do if we wanted to reduce our holdings, and all I see is that were going to have to sell.  So my question for Trish is this:  Is the bottom line that the plan is basically buy and hold? In other words, when were buying now, were basically committing to a very large balance sheet for a very long period of time, and then the other stuff is all a question mark about what that means in terms of macroeconomics, that is, whether its worrisome or dangerous or not.  But as far as the balance sheet itself, its ramping up, and we dont see good ways to mitigate that. MS. MOSSER. I have two responsesat least two.  The first is that certainly buy and hold has been the staffs maintained hypothesis when we do Seths pictures of the size of the balance sheet. And if were going to be reducing excess reserves in the future, while we could do it through selling, probably our first stepand I think this would be the staffs biaswould be to use the reverse repo market in order to manage to a higher federal funds rate.  So thats my 
first responseas a baseline, probably yes. 
 However, there are a couple of caveats to that.  It does very much depend on how the Committee wants to react to whatever the macro and financial conditions are at the time we are exiting. One can imagine a scenario, the really high-inflation scenario that Seth played out, where the Committee might very much want to tighten financial conditions in the broad economy very quickly.  Selling a really large quantity of assets very quickly would probably achieve that for you, no matter how we manage the short-term interest rate. So I think its very dependent on the Committees views at the time that exit comes around. Its possible to do, but the question is:  Will that be what the Committee wants to do, both with the size of the balance sheet and in terms of influencing financial conditions? MR. BULLARD. If you get into a high-inflation environment, its too late.  Weve already failed at that point. I can believe at that point you might want to take more radical action, but the idea is to get this optimal path.  MS. MOSSER. We have been purchasing these securities on the upside very quickly, with the intent of influencing private credit rates.  On the exit side, at the point we would decide to sell, we have been going with the assumption that we would exit much more slowly in the optimal case.  We would sell very slowly and in small quantitiesthis is not built into Seths baseline, but we could do thisin the way that we have been purchasing Treasury securities for decades, which is to buy regularly, in tiny amounts, being as market-neutral as humanly possible.  That can be achieved, but thats a slow unwinding.  Its faster than whats built into Seths pictures, but its quite small.  A big year would be $50 billion or $70 billion on the purchase side, on the upside, in the old days. So we would assume that size on the downside.  So its not a rapid way to bring down the balance sheet. 
 MR. BULLARD.  Earlier this spring we were thinking of having Fed bills or a Treasury program that would mitigate this problem.  But those are now politically off the table. Is it correct to think that now that theyre off the table we have basically committed to a large balance sheet? Thats the way I read these memos. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. They wouldnt affect the size of the balance sheet.  Theyre just alternative ways of financing, which is what we are talking about. MS. MOSSER. Fed bills, or doing reverse repos for that matter, wouldnt shrink the balance sheet, they would simply shrink reserves; that is, they would affect the liability side of our balance sheet, but not the asset sidethe assets would still be just as big. MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER. I have a very brief intervention, because its related exactly to this point. Brian, a little earlier when I asked you the question about agency debt, you said that you presumed we were going to go to the limit on that.  Is it the expectation of the Desk and the markets that the operative words of up to certain amounts in our policy statements are 
basically irrelevant, and that, in fact, were viewed as committed to going to those amounts and we wouldnt consider doing less? MR. SACK. Actually, what I said before was that the Desk may exercise the up to part of the directive. And what I meant by that is that we may not get to the entire $200 billion on 
account of these concerns. Now, the question is:  What does the market expect?  We actually changed our procedures for accepting tenders on agency debt in a way that we think is going to taper off the pace and perhaps leave us short. I would say this hasnt garnered a ton of market attention. There may be a period during which they have to learn and adjust to that, or it may 
    just not be that big of a deal.  So I think the markets understand we have some flexibility.  They havent reached a definitive conclusion that the SOMA holdings may fall well short of $200 billion. But presumably over the next several months there will be increasing inference in that direction, if things evolve the way we expect. MR. PLOSSER. Do you think the same is true for the MBS and Treasuries? MR. SACK. I think the purchases of the Treasuries have been regular and steady and nonresponsive to market conditions, and thats very well understood at this point in the markets.  For MBS, I think what happened is that, over this intermeeting period, the markets learned that the Desk was less responsive than they anticipated.  The current MBS secondary rates reflect that understanding.  Its just that the adjustment of how they got there was perhaps lumpier because of that learning. I think the secondary MBS rates stayed lower for longer, because there was this 
assumption about more Desk responsiveness, and they then had to adjust up more abruptly.  But on net, its at a point where the markets seem to understand that the Desk is exercising only limited discretion in terms of making those purchases. MS. MOSSER. One comment: On the primary dealer survey that we do before every meeting, we did ask this question about probabilities of increasing versus decreasing.  We didnt really ask the up to part, we just asked whether the sizes might be decreased.  In all three categories, there was some weight put on decreasing the size of the programs.  If Im recalling the numbers correctly, it was smallest for the Treasury program, but thats partly because its scheduled to end in September, and its closer to being done.  But there is some weight being put on decreases in size, meaning not getting all the way. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
  MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To continue the grilling of Brian and Trish, my interpretation in sort of street terms of what you said earlier is that the directive has been a problem for the Desk for last few weeks.  And were in somewhat extraordinary times where you may have been uncomfortableIm putting words in your mouththat you were making policy as opposed to interpreting the wishes of the Committee.  Can you be more explicit about what youd like to see in a directive that would work, and yet at the same time deal with the external communication sensitivities? MS. MOSSER. Okay. Ill take a stab at that one.  I dont know that it is so much that we didnt have a sense of what the Committee wanted, although there were times when perhaps we didnt have perfect clarity, but rather its that I dont think the public and the markets always understood. For example, there was discussion in the market that the Treasury purchase program was going to be immediately expanded in the middle of Mayin an intermeeting periodand extended and enlarged substantially as Treasury rates continued to rise.  In fact, this was a shockingly widely held opinion, despite the Chairmans public statements that were close to being to the contrary. So, on the communication issue, everyone understands that these are very unusual programs, but it would be good to clarify what your expectations are in terms of the 
direction of what the programs are likely or not likely to do.  For the Treasury purchase program, in particular, theres a bit less clarity.  For the MBS program and the agency program, the markets have now figured out that, up to a point, narrowing spreads was the goal.  As for going further than that, the Desk is likely to step back and say, Were not going to become the 100 percent only investor. But they learned that by watching what we were doing as opposed to 
getting a communication from the Committee.  If your preference is steady as she goes through the end of the programs, subject to the caveat that if conditions improve the Committee may use 
 the up to option, then that would help as sort of a basic starting point.  Beyond that, it depends on what the Committees true views are about the ultimate goals of the programs and whether they should be enlarged or kept the same size. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I can build on that.  Could you imagine language like, will respond to market conditions, spreads, and the pace of issuance, or something like that?  Would you recommend something like that?  Would you propose something like that? If so, you need to think about that. Is that what you had in mind, President Lockhart? MS. MOSSER. If the Committee is comfortable with the option that I spoke about in my presentation for flexibility within asset classes and agrees with our assessment that, subject to this sort of communication, it would be useful, then that would be the right kind of clarifying statement. MR. SACK. I would say that, if the Committee is comfortable with the degree of flexibility that the Desk has been exercising, then I would leave it alone, in terms of public communications at least. To the extent that you start to change the directive, its going to involve a lot of guessing about what has changed and whats going to happen now.  I think the market has gone through a learning process that may have caused some abrupt movements here and there, but it has gotten to a point where it pretty much understands that the general approach is slow and steady, with some flexibility around that in response to market functioning.  And if thats what the Committee is comfortable with, were at a point where we dont need any kind of public clarification. If the Committee wanted the Desk to be more responsive to market interest rates, then that would require some kind of communication to the market, so that they didnt have to infer it over time just from our actions. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think many of us on the Committee would be looking to you to tell us if you think theres a strategy that, for a given amount of purchases, would achieve better results, and, if so, what that is and how you would recommend communicating about it.  I think we have to rely on your market knowledge to do that.  So if you do believe thats the case, perhaps for the next meeting or before then, you could present us with some alternatives.  But if you think where we are now is fine, thats good, too.  But lets not fail to take advantage of some improved operating process, if it gives us better results. MS. MOSSER. Assuming the up to sizes stay where they are, I think I agree completely with Brian, particularly regarding the Treasury program, where we simply dont think anything other than slow and steady is probably the appropriate implementation strategy given its current size and its current expiration date.  We are already, frankly, moving in the direction of more flexibility, as Brian described, on the agency debt program, and well continue to move that way, assuming that the spreads dont widen and we dont get dislocations in the opposite direction.  If flexibility is going to be useful, it would be in the MBS program, and, obviously, wed be happy to write down a couple of alternatives for the next meeting.  It might help clarify the language. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Another alternative may just be to clarify in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, rather than coming up with a whole new vehicle.  It could just provide a bit more language about what the intent of the programs is and about our thought 
processes. From my perspective, the statement and the minutes are not great vehicles for communicating about this. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But if were departing from what weve been doing, we want the Committee to VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Im assuming that were going to stay on the same path.  I still think it would be useful to have something in the Humphrey-Hawkins report that explains what this is. And then, if we depart, I agree, I think wed have a different directive. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, did you have a comment? MR. LACKER. Yes. I think you are right, Mr. Chairman, to ask the Desk for their suggestions as to language that would help them achieve the results we desire.  A corollary to that is that they understand the results we desire. My interpretation of what we decided when we embarked on this was to achieve whatever improvement in MBS yields would result from the quantity we sketched out, not to peg yields at a given level, not to dampen fluctuations in yields, not to reduce the dispersion of future yield outcomes, and not to respond in the way the markets seem to expect us to respond.  We didnt put that in the directive, obviously, and we didnt put that in the statement either.  In preparing for this meeting, I looked at the statements and read them from the perspective of the intermeeting period, and it strikes me that there are things in the statements that markets could have latched onto that led them to misinterpret what results we desired to achieve. I think thats useful to keep in mind. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats fair enough, but there may even be technical issues, like not wanting to be the only buyer, and things of that sort, that we would want to communicate. Other questions?  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Mr. Chairman, really a question for you, not for this side of the table.  The Treasury proposed that it would have the last call in approving 13(3) authorizations.  Have we developed a view on that and communicated that in any way? 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As I mentioned, I would like to defer that to lunch tomorrow, but I will present all of these issues and tell you about the report and the other aspects that well start undertaking, and then cover it at that time.  Other questions? Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought someone might ask this, which is why I didnt get in the queue. Brian, what kind of reaction do you expect from markets and economic commentators to the press release the Chairman is working on?  He read us part of the draft on the modifications to the various liquidity facilities.  Specifically, do you think theres much of a chance that it will be read as, if not the beginning of tightening, the lifting up of the screwdriver and placing it against the screw? [Laughter] Id also be interested in what Brian Sack and Trish think about that. MR. MADIGAN. First of all, it is complicated, and I think it will take a while for people to understand all of the elements, assuming the Board and the FOMC follow the staff recommendation.  A second point, though, is that it will be read very much in the context of the announcement tomorrow and what that says about your intentions with respect to the federal funds rate, the asset purchases, and so on.  In some sense that will really very much condition the reaction, because, among other things, that will give the economic backdrop, the rationale, for how the Committee is approaching monetary policy at this stage. MR. SACK. I would add that without the sentences that the Chairman read, its a somewhat mixed release.  At least one program is being scaled down, but others are being extended, so the direction is not really clear.  I think the focal point of the markets would be the sentences that were read about the extended date being the expected terminal date, and I do think theres some risk that that will be seen as the first stepas you said, lifting the screwdriver.  
So it is a risk. 
      MS. MOSSER. I would agree with that. It is a small risk.  Because of this renewal, the swap partners are aware of at least that portion of the press release, although not of the rest of the liquidity facilities, obviously. We informed them that some language along the lines of what the Chairman read would likely be in the press release.  Their reaction in a number of cases was: Oh, well, were not going to put anything like that in our press release, and a couple of them were outright concerned about it.  So there was a dispersionsome thought it was fine, and others not. I would agree with BrianI think there is a risk.  I dont know that its large, but there is a small risk that it would be viewed as a bit of tightening.  MR. TARULLO. I presume that, if you had thought of this, you would have already suggested it, but does anything come to mind that would allow us to mitigate that risk? MS. MOSSER. The last sentence that was added to the press release, which says the Board and the Committee would also consider expanding if things get worse, helps to mitigate that risk quite a bit. MR. TARULLO. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. SACK. The statement is conditioned on anticipated further improvement that hasnt really been defined. So I think it leaves open some issues.  If conditions just stay where they are, does that mean the programs will be extended? How much improvement is expected?  And so on. I would just say its complicated to signal that so far in advance. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Is the risk all to the downside? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think its mixedthere are extensions going on as well as some trimming back. 
  MR. LACKER. Yes. But is termination also potentially a signal of the confidence we have in the economy and financial conditions?  Is there a chance theyd interpret it that way? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im not sure I want to litigate this here, although Id be happy to have discussions with people. Its very conditional.  If I could once more read just part of it: Should the recent improvements in market conditions continue, the Board and the FOMC currently anticipate that a number of these facilities may not need to be extended beyond February 1. However, if financial stresses do not moderate as expected, the Board and the FOMC are prepared to extend and so on. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. I have a clarifying question on the discussions around exit strategy and the LSAP. Would there be, then, a discussion at each meeting as to whether we should go to the up to limit?  In other words, should there be a specific decision whether to go forward? I think you have to address that before you start talking more generally about raising the fed funds rate. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Certainly. Thats part of the policy strategy. MR. HOENIG. All right. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In just a minute we can take a coffee break, if that is okay. When we come back, we will have a bit more discussion among the group on the issues that 
were raised by the presentations. Let me just try to identify three topics that we might want to talk about. The first one is Brians recommendations on trimming back the various facilities or extending facilities. Well have to take some Board and FOMC votes on that.  You have Brians handout that shows the recommendations of the staff.  So if anyone has thoughts on any of those, that would be the first issue that I would suggest. 
  The second is the set of issues related to exiting from our expanded balance sheet and raising interest rates.  Let me just say that many people have called for us to communicate more about this, and I think thats very important.  The current plan is for the Monetary Policy Report, which will be issued in a few weeks, to have a section which will describe, in some more detail than weve given so far, the tools wed be looking at to achieve the exit.  We dont want to put in things that are very speculative.  But to the extent that the Committee is comfortable with things like reverse repos, and so on, wed want to describe those in that section.  So any thoughts or comments about the relative value of different methods or concerns would be useful. And then, the third topic would be just the things that Trish and Brian were raising and that President Hoenig alluded to, which is thinking about the asset purchase strategy.  Even if we dont change our position at this meeting, do we want to begin thinking about a tapering strategy?  Do we want to advise the Desk to change its reaction function?  So we can discuss things related to that set of issues. Of course, whatever else you want to bring up is fine, but I thought those three areas might be worth comments in the free discussion period. Before we do that, why dont we refresh ourselves with about a fifteen-minute coffee break? Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The floor is now open for people whod like to make comments on the three topics I mentioned before the break or anything else that the presentations brought to mind.  I want everyone to have a chance to speak, but I do hope we can get to the economic presentation today.  If we can do this in 45 minutes or so, that would be very helpful.  Would anyone like to start off?  Governor Warsh. 
   MR. WARSH.  Mr. Chairman, let me try to be brief but address a couple of the topics that were raised in the so-called question part of the discussion.  And then Ill try to go through the topics that you mentioned briefly. First, the remittance discussion, where I think we put that in legal termsSeth was asked for decided legal judgmentsand we put it in political terms.  I think most of the remittance discussion actually is about credibility.  In the event bad things happen and we end up with losses that are enduring, what does that do to the credibility of Fed actions? The Feds ability to affect these markets typically comes not because of the size of the actions, but because of who is taking them.  So I think that credibility could suffer in those circumstances, and Ill try to use that credibility idea to consider whether we are crowding in other investors to these markets or crowding out other investors for the balance of my discussion on your third point on asset purchases. The Desk asked for our views on several topics.  First, on the policy objectives of the asset purchases, I think markets have heard us say different things about what our objective function is. Mine would be to improve market functioning, to bring liquidity to markets that are not trading, to narrow bidasked spreads, and the like.  This would suggest having the Desk devote its resources to securities, such as off-the-run securities, that are less liquid.  I think markets have heard other objectives from us, although not explicit objectives, such as to set price levels across Treasuries or MBS. I think we have rightly steered away from it.  But they think that we are still cognizant of prices at some level and that we are trying to move rates lower.  So the first question the Desk asked is:  Could we collectively be clear on an objective function? I think we could, and I would suggest that your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony and Monetary Policy Report might be the best means of doing so. 
  The second question raised by the Desk was about expanding asset purchases.  Im exceptionally uncomfortable with expanding asset purchases, particularly now.  The Desk, I think, had a preference, understandably, for increasing Treasuries.  That doesnt fit my preferred objective, which is that were entering markets to improve market functioning.  So, on that basis, I think that market was working well before we got in it, and Id say its still working well.  But if we got into it in significant size, I could see it actually working less well.  Had risk-free rates fallen markedly since we started purchasing Treasuries, Mr. Chairman, I would have expected some to say:  Well, then we should do more of it.  But risk-free rates have increased since we started purchasing, yet I hear some say, Well, we should do more of it.  So Im not sure what 
fact scenario would have suggested doing less of it, and it makes me a little uncomfortable.  I think Brian Sack did a great job of explaining how all-in costs of capital for real private companies in this market have come down, and meaningfully so.  I dont think that has much, if 
anything, to do with our Treasury purchases.  It could have much to do with the suite of things that weve done in the last 20 months, but I think it gives too much credit to suggest that somehow thats related to the purchases of Treasuries.  I dont think that our science is so good that we know that increasing the size of our Treasury purchases to $450 billion, but not to $750 billion, would have a modest, marginally positive effect.  Its not at all obvious to me where risk-free rates would be had we avoided buying Treasuries; they might have been higher or they might have been lower.  But I must say Im not convinced, and as a result, not at all comfortable expanding further. In terms of the expanding purchases of agencies, I think the Desk rightly warns us that doing so could actually do some harm to that market.  Given how big we are to the new issuance market there, I think we might well have already done some harm.  That is, we entered that 
 market when it wasnt functioning, and we helped improve market functioning.  But to the extent that were 70 or 80 percent of certain classes of securities, I would say that that two-sided market is not forming well, and I would be very hesitant to go further there. The third question raised by the Desk:  What about flexibility between and among asset classes, that is, what if we just pool all of this stuff together and say were smart and were going to use the following criteria?  I think that would be read by markets to mean that were increasing potentially the purchases of Treasuries.  I think that would risk crowding out those investors who would think that there are strange things afoot, so I dont think thats a prudent idea. In terms of flexibility within asset classes, I think markets have learned that were not as responsive to changes in rates as they would like, and my own sense would be its a noble goal to have flexibility, but flexibility in a vacuum will lead to continued ambiguity or accentuated ambiguity.  So I dont think that thats a great way forward. In terms of increasing flexibility to be more responsive to market rates, I just dont think we should be fighting against the tape here.  Im not sure we know what the real market-clearing rates are for some of these things.  In terms of securities lending, which I think has been much abused outside of the Federal Reserve and poorly understood by market participants, I share Brians view that our being in the securities lending business could actually be useful to solve what I would consider to be the preeminent policy objective of helping market functioning 
improve. So thats just a quick list of some of the things that you asked us to address, Mr. Chairman.  On Brian Madigans modifications of various liquidity facilities, I think it is confidence-inducing, not risk-inducing, for the world to know that we are thinking about exits.  Even those market participants who think that the economy could well unwind again will believe 
   that we can be more comfortable improvising in a forward-leaning way if we can at the same time be thinking about how we get out of this when conditions warrant.  Without going into detail on Brians list, I think its constructive, and I think that the Thursday press release is likely to be in some ways more impactful to markets understanding of our way forward than our FOMC statement on Wednesday.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On your three questions, I agree with much of what Governor Warsh just said.  In terms of exit strategies, I think the staff did a terrific job in thinking through this and in the very elegant way they laid out the options.  In my own personal view, I think we could be a little more aggressive in either cutting quantities or moving minimum bids up in some combination, particularly for the TAF and even for some of the others, in terms of the haircuts. In general, Im very supportive of the strategy.  The only thing I was very disappointed in was the GSE facility.  That facility came on not quite a year ago.  It has never been used. The Treasury got funding to support the GSEs.  I would have liked to have seen that facility rescinded back in September or October after the Treasury got funding.  I still think it ought to be rescinded. I dont think that is a place we ought to be.  I do think the announcement of these modifications to the facilities and particularly the language in the press release that the Chairman read will, in fact, be positive for the economy as a whole.  There may be some places in the markets that will lose the subsidies that some of these things might be providing, but on net I think it will be a good signal to the marketplace. On the tools for managing the balance sheet, again, there were a lot of interesting ideas.  I think many of them could work.  I would just like to reiterate how strongly I feel about not wanting to have Fed bills. It is a bad idea, not because it cant manage the balance sheet, but 
    because I fear that it poses incredible political risks to the System.  Its an opportunity for interference, an opportunity for the Congress and the political parties to view this as another way to intrude on Federal Reserve policymaking.  Although we may ask for the autonomy to make those decisions, that doesnt necessarily guarantee that they will grant it.  I have expressed this view before. I feel very strongly about Fed bills as not a good way to go in this environment; many of the other tools, though, such as reverse repos and others, could accomplish much the same thing, and I would encourage us to continue to work on those and the other options, because they entail much less potential political risk. On the LSAP issues, I agree with almost everything Kevin just said.  Our objectives, I thought, were fairly clear; that is, were not targeting a price or a yield.  The markets seemed to believe that we were. I think we would be well served, as was suggested, by clarifying it, perhaps in the Chairmans testimony in July, to try to reinforce that and disabuse the markets. I was struck by some of the other things that the Desk was talking about.  I want to read a couple of sentences, and I quote: Staff sees evidence of both stock and flow impacts from our experience so far, although we cannot be certain of the precise mechanism by which they work, or if the effects are permanent or transitory.  That leaves a considerable degree of uncertainty in designing and implementing the LSAP programs.  That suggests to me we dont know exactly what were doing or how its working, and so that argues against flexibility and the notion that were going to go in there and play some game to raise this yield or lower that spread when, in fact, we dont know how these mechanisms are working.  So I guess I would steer away from the 
flexibility.  I think that the slow but steady path is just fine, and that we can clarify that we are not targeting a particular yield or price, but rather were encouraging market functioning and liquidity, and leave it at that. 
  In terms of the expansion, we still have a lot of purchases we could make if we wanted to.  Im opposed to going out and authorizing more purchases of agency debt, MBS, or Treasuries at this point. I dont think we need to make that decision right now.  And if anything, things are looking somewhat better.  So I would oppose that. I would also be against this notion of going in and buying hybrid ARMs or creating options. I think we do that because we can.  Its not clear to me what the objective is.  We have been pretty unclear as to exactly how effective we have been in some of these markets on some of these prices and yields and what exactly the impacts are going to be.  I think the evidence is pretty mixed on our ability to go in and sort of micromanage various subsectors of these markets.  So I dont see any particular reason to expand into hybrid ARMs or to sell put options on longer-term assets.  I just do not think that is going to help us very much.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, youre going to hear some similarity to what you just heard from Governor Warsh and President Plosser.  I agree with most of the statements that were made.  I feel particularly strongly about the issue of the Treasuries.  As Governor Warsh mentioned, Im beyond particularly uncomfortable, I am especially uncomfortable.  I think 
theres no evidence that it has a positive impact.  We can tell ourselves and we can tell the marketplace that, indeed, the corporate debt market has improved.  Im rather pleased with that; obviously, we all are. Im not sure theres direct causality, but I do think the risk-return tradeoff is way too negative. Even if we figure out a cute way to say it, there still is a suspicion that were monetizing deficits, although weve been much firmer in our public statements on that.  And I realize that in chart 4 thats just a somewhat important factor, but it is a factor, and I worry about that. 
 I want to come back to Brians recommendations.  I think we have to be very careful that were not perceived as basically providing facilities to prop up institutions that are too big to fail at the expense of other institutions that desire to grow.  In my earlier remarks, I used the wrong term.  I said political, and I meant opticalI think the optics are rather poor.  If TAF is being used, as was pointed out in the staff paper, principally or significantly by two institutions that are too big to fail, I think we have to be careful about that.  President Plosser made a suggestion that we might limit it even more severely in terms of the amounts; I think he was suggesting a pricing impact there.  Obviously, classical central banking is to lend at a penalty rate. But that penalty rate is a gift compared to what we would be charging smaller and regional banks. Therefore, I would ask you to go through the list and think of which of these facilities are really in place to prop up institutions that are too big to fail.  And I would be curious as to which of those facilities you consider as actually having an impact there and as helpful on that front and which are not.  But I reiterate my concerns about the optics of TAF and the primary credit recommendations.   On the issue of exiting, obviously the market is asking for it.  Everybodys asking for it. I do think the Monetary Policy Report, Mr. Chairman, is the appropriate vehicle, and, perhaps, your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. Like President Plosser, I personally am uncomfortable with Fed bills.  I dont think it is politically feasible. The staff points that out. I worry about the market that would be made in those and the derivatives that would be written from them.  I have spoken to that before, but I dont think that is a particularly wise recommendation to make. 
   I will make one last recommendation, only half in jest, which is that we get rid of the TALF program and we call that the Bill Nelson Relief Act.  [Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If we got rid of it, it would be a relief for Bill Nelson, Im sure. [Laughter] Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Im now a little confused.  It sounds to me as though were now having the monetary policy discussion, and if thats what were going to do, thats fine.  I just want to know if thats what were actually doing. MR. FISHER. I was just reacting to the three points that were raised. MR. TARULLO. I think were now getting to the substance of what I thought was going to be tomorrows discussion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, Ill leave it to people to do what they want.  I think the issues that we were discussing were the exit tools, the tactics for the Desk in dealing with large-scale asset purchases, and the winding down of the programs.  Those were the things that I asked people to talk about, so perhaps we could focus on those.  President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill try to be brief and confine my remarks to the three things that you asked about.  With respect to the credit and liquidity facilities and the timing of trimming them back, I thought that Brian and the staff put forward a very well thought out proposal, and its a proposal I completely support.  I think it is important to include language of the type that you read from the draft that youre preparing.  Ill say this again in the policy round, but I want to emphasize that we have to be very careful not to signal an early end to policy stimulus, and while I see a good reason to withdraw the facilities in the manner that you 
 set out, I think its very important to put in place language that leans against the idea that were looking for an early end to policy stimulus. So I support the proposal and the language you read. On exit strategies, I do think you indicated that you might discuss this in detail in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.  I think thats absolutely the right place to do it, and I think its important to indicate that we have complete confidence in our ability to withdraw stimulus when we need to do so, that we have the tools to do it, and that when the time comes, which is not now or soon, that we will proceed to do it. The wording for monetary policy alternative B has been changed, but the phrasing in the original draft of B is the type of thing I think we have to be very careful to avoid.  It suggests that were not sure if we have the ability to exit and, therefore, we will carefully consider whether we 
should expand our balance sheet further.  I believe we do have the tools.  I thought the staff did a wonderful job of preparing the memo on exit strategies.  It convinced me that, if the only thing we had to work with was interest on reserves, it probably would be sufficient.  I thought this idea of strengthening it through collateralized accounts was really clever, was implementable, and was almost foolproof.  And I would love to see the staff do the further work that would be 
necessary to confirm that that is a foolproof technique, adding to the arsenal of tools, such as triparty reverse repos, and making sure that that is entirely workable.  To me, it seems that package, if we do nothing else, is sufficient for us to assert confidently that we can do what is needed when the time comes.  But that time is not now. On the LSAPs, they obviously do get into policy issues, and let me try to leave some of the policy issues around this until tomorrow.  Initially I was an enthusiast for long-term Treasury purchases. I thought the purpose of it was not only to improve liquidity and market functioning, but also to influence yields to push them down.  Now, I didnt see it as a commitment to a 
  particular rate, which would be very dangerous; but, other things equal, and depending on our assessment of overall financial conditions and the outlook, I saw it as an attempt to push rates lower than they would otherwise be. On theoretical grounds, I believe theres a very strong case that they should have some effect, but it has been awfully hard to identify exactly what that effect is, and I think that were beginning to run into costs of pursuing that further.  I think our reputation for independence is suffering, and the public is obviously concerned that were monetizing the debt and that its going to lead to an outbreak of inflation.  I have to say that I completely disagree with these views, but I cant say theyre not prevalent.  I encounter them day in and day out. So at the present time, I would say the benefits dont merit the costs, but I wouldnt want to see Treasuries taken off the table if conditions were to deteriorate and attitudes were to change. I think our communications around this have really been a problem, and as I consider the concrete proposals the staff put forward in their memo, it seems to me that improving our communications is important.  The thing that most concerns me is the autumn expiration date for our long-term Treasury purchase program.  Thats coming up quickly.  We either have to decide now or well have to decide in August. There will be a lot of market speculation.  In the meantime if we could do something at this meeting to clarify rather than keep the market guessing, I think it would be desirable. This brings me to the suggestionwhich is a policy decision, but to my mind, in some sense, a relatively small oneto add a sentence that says something like to align the end dates (or the timing) of the three asset purchase programs, weve extended the current pace of Treasury purchases through the end of the year, bringing the total size of the program to $450 billion.  That would say they are all aligned at the end of the year 
   and that were going to decide what to do with these programs.  I would like to see us take that off the table. Quickly, on other issues, I could see some merit in flexibility in terms of the allocation of our purchases between MBS and Treasuries. We didnt have a concrete proposal, but assuming that were not going to expand the overall level of our Treasury purchases, except perhaps extending the program at the current pace to the end of the year, then I agree that this isnt the right time to go in that direction. The idea of leaning against the windI could see some merit in it, but it will be incredibly complicated to reach agreement and communicate to the Desk or to the outside world what were doing, and I wouldnt go there now at all.  Id just maintain steady as you go. I do think the idea of adding hybrid ARMs to the program is very constructive, given whats happening in the housing market and given that mortgage rates have backed up so much, so if thats a viable, practical possibility, I would move in that direction, too. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In thinking about the three issues you raised, I start from the presumption that we dont need to convince market participants at this stage that we will do what it takes to, if possible, restore stability and to encourage financial and economic health. I think we need to convince them that we have an exit strategy and that we are prepared to execute it in a timely way. So against that background, with regard to the trimming and extending of the liquidity facilities, Im generally fine with the proposal that Brian described and the language that you put forward. If it were my nickel, I might tighten up that language and make the commitment to end 
   the programs a little more forcefully, but the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony might be a better place to elaborate on that whole set of issues. With regard to the LSAP, those suggestions strike me as solutions in search of a problem. What I mean by that is that financial market conditions have been getting better.  Now, maybe interest rates have backed up, but there are a number of explanations for that, and its very difficult to sort through exactly which might be responsible.  If conditions hadnt been improving, I might be interested in trying to fine-tune the LSAP, but because they have been improving, I dont see any great valuein fact, I dont see any value whatsoeverin going down that path, and I would avoid it. With regard to exiting and raising interest rates when the time comes, I guess I think there are a variety of tools that would enable us to address the situation.  Theyve been discussed. I am not terribly concerned about this. I dont quite understand the issue about having committed ourselves to a permanently large balance sheet.  The size of the balance sheet is up to the Committee ultimately, and if we decide that we want to shrink it, then we simply give the directive to the Desk that it should be shrunk, and they will have to execute that.  So I dont see that as a problem. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would start with Brians description, and Im generally supportive of this proposal.  It does give an end date, and I agree with President SternI think the firmer that end date is, of course, the better. On the TAF issue that President Fisher brought up, I think he has valid points, but I do think we need to look at that pretty carefully, and I know you are going to do some follow-up on that. 
    And because were talking about exit strategies, and these liquidity facilities are part of it, it does extend to the LSAP.  From my perspective, the most unusual thing that we have is the LSAP, and I think thats where we need to focus when we think about exit strategy.  I think at each meeting we should first make a decision about whether we even want to go to where we have said the up to figure is. It becomes very important that we make a rational choice around that, because the first step of exiting is not going any further.  I think thats critical and takes time and effort.  I also think having the equivalent of GSE assets on our balance sheet with these MBS is questionable in terms of the role of the central bank, if we have, in fact, stabilized the markets.  And I am very uneasy about purchasing long-term Treasuries.  Perhaps it is optics, but I think in some sense its also realityyou are monetizing the debt.  So thats how I think about our exit strategy across all the actions weve taken. In terms of the flexibility on how to administer this, I think we should not have flexibility. If we met the needs of the MBS that we put on, and now our additional purchases are causing other issues, then thats a sign, perhaps, that we shouldnt be going to the limit.  I think we should be aware of this and take note of it and not just say, Well, weve got to get to the total. Lets shift over to long-term Treasuries.  Theres information in the feedback we are getting from the market that we ought to use and not ignore.  Thats how I look at your three questions, and less flexibility in the third is better than more. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill take the points in the sequence that you mentioned. On Brians and the staffs facility recommendations, although I long for the day when we are comfortable with markets to the point of ending 13(3) authority, Im not bothered by the 
   individual programs.  I think theyre well put together, and I think the plan, as stated, is a good one. Frankly, I think markets will see the conditional statements in the release as indicating our willingness to keep the 13(3) authority for a time.  I wouldnt think that they would think were about to ramp it down, but well see. And I do think that ending 13(3) will be done appropriately, it will be positive, it will be a boost, much like the SCAP. On the exit strategies and the reserve management tools, much as President Yellen indicated, I tend to favor the tools that strengthen the interest on excess reserves mechanism, and there are a number of those that, put together, should strengthen the arbitrage.  Reverse RPs, I think, are also a good tool. If were looking to the money market funds as one source of liquidity, thats going to sort of alter the commercial paper market, since theyre a big source of funding there. And I just dont know what the implications are.  Wed want to understand expected dysfunction in that marketas opposed to unexpected dysfunctionto see what wed be doing there. But reverse RPs are quite good, I think. On the comment that we should try to project complete confidence in our ability to do this, mostly I agree with that.  My first reaction is that youve actually talked quite a lot about exit strategies already. And in your Q&A with the Congress, Im not exactly sure how much of what you intend to say will be new.  Just your saying it is newsworthy of course.  [Laughter] But 
Im not quite sure how that will play out.  I was very struck by the extreme scenario on net income which indicated that the balance sheet would be so large that we could find ourselves in a situation where we are challenged by itchallenged in an optics sense, not in our ability to create new reserves to pay and fund what we need to do.  As weve learned through the introduction of all of our facilities and in using our authorities, there is a risk to the institution at 
  some level that we should be mindful of.  I should add that I think it is being handled very well so far. Finally, on the large-scale asset purchasesand Ill try to be true to not talking about policy on this. The Committee selected a number, for example, for Treasury purchases, of $300 billion, and I thought that it would be implemented to that number.  So if tapering effects are important for a given time frame, then I would have envisioned going at X dollars per month for a time, and then within the last one or two months tapering to half of that.  That allows the 
Committee to revisit it in a timely fashion to say, Should we extend it? as President Yellen suggested, or it could be tapered on to $300 billion.  But it would be a policy decision that the Committee makes.  Ill leave it at that.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I agree with everyone else.  We absolutely need a framework that people can have confidence in for how were going to exit the current balance sheet and raise interest rates.  But as well discuss tomorrow, I think its way too early to begin that exit, and I do worry about signaling an exit before the economy is really ready for it. But we do need to have the framework.  In that regard, Im comfortable with the liquidity facilities proposals in Brians memo.  I think basically they recognize and validate whats already happening in the market, and thats fine.  And I was comfortable with the sentence you read, Mr. Chairman.  I think it was sufficiently conditional, and I wouldnt strengthen it.  My 
concern is that, if we find ourselves in a position where we dont want to wind down, we havent already told people we are going to wind down, but rather we have told people we are going to be looking at things. 
 I came in a little like President Fisher, looking for perhaps raising that TAF minimum bid rate, thinking that, unlike all the other facilities we have, thats one that doesnt quite wind down as automatically as markets improve.  My mind is still open on that.  I havent heard a lot of support for that, but I thought raising that would reinforce the winding down.  I appreciate Brians point that its an auction facilitythey can always cut the amounts rather than raise the price; but raising the price would reinforce that.  So I guess, on balance, I would be slightly in favor of raising the TAF penalty rates. On exit tools, I was actually encouraged by the presentations by the staffSpence, Trish, and otherswhich indicated that we do have a lot of tools.  And, like President Evans, I see these tools for sterilizing or reducing reserves working together with interest on reserves, and I feel more confident than before I read the memo that we can accomplish a lot.  I guess youre going to have to work on these reverse RPswho the counterparties are (including the GSEs) and whether you need to diversify past the dealers.  Im not totally convinced you do need to; the dealers are there to be intermediaries, and they can play that role.  Anyhow, that would be a good thing. And the time deposits I thought also were a good thing. I wouldnt rule out selling assets quite as much as some of you would.  We took these special actions to lower ratesI will come to that nextbut if were in a situation where we are worried about inflation, we can undo them, although maybe not in huge size.  I would think selling some of the portfolios, depending on the circumstances, might not be a bad idea.  That brings me to the LSAPs.  My objectives were different from yours, Governor Warsh. I voted for this in order to lower interest rates, or at least to make interest rates lower than they otherwise would be. It was keyed to the macroeconomic outlook last March, which was pretty dire and getting worse all the time, and we had run out of fed funds ammunition in 
    December.  So I was not uncomfortable. I was in favor of diversifying our portfolio of purchases into Treasuries. I think the monetizing problem is keyed to the fiscal deficit outlook.  If that werent so uncertain and looking so unsustainable, I dont think people would be worried about us. But it is uncertain and looking unsustainable, so I think we need to be careful about the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy.  Therefore, I would not be in favor of increasing those purchases at this time. I came into the meeting thinking about some flexibility across instruments within the total amount and across time.  But Ive been discouraged by the discussion at the meeting.  I think we can set a price or we can set a quantity, but setting the relationships of price and quantity in a clear way is just very, very hard. So I think Id stick with what we are doing now. I would be okay with small purchases of hybrid ARMs.  I think it might encourage that market a little bit and help the mortgage market, which has been adversely affected by the uptick in Treasury rates. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we have to be really careful about our communications in terms of discriminating between our ability to exit smoothly and implying that were about to exit.  I will probably come back to this point 
tomorrow.  The anxiety that I have about inadvertently implying to the market that we are exiting soon is particularly high now, because the market has already priced in a lot more tightening than most of us think is likely over the next year or two.  That said, of course, we have to be prepared for exit, and I think being prepared for exit and articulating that is really, really important in keeping inflation expectations well anchored, and also in keeping the dispersion of inflation 
   expectations compact.  So I think we definitely have to do that, but I think its tricky to do one without implying the other. In terms of Brians recommendations on the facilities, Im pretty comfortable with all of it. I do want to make sure the language stays where it is, though, and doesnt get more definitive about what happens in February.  I think February is a long time away, and I wouldnt want to prejudge what were going to want to do or not want to do in February.  I think where we are right now in terms of the language is about right.  It basically says theres a possibility that we might not extend it, so the market is put on notice.  But it doesnt necessarily commit us to ending the facilities. On the TAF, I am on the other side of that issue from Don on the rate rise.  Its not a big deal for me, but let me just explain why I am on the other side.  I think raising the rate on TAF will be seized upon by some as the beginning of raising interest rates.  So its not the TAF rate rise that bothers me per se.  I can certainly understand the argument for doing that in the small, but Im a little worried that if we do it, people will say, Oh, look, this is the very beginning of the rate hikes, because they have now raised the rate on the TAF.  Theres also a second, more subtle issue on the TAF, if we are actually going to go to the sporadic TAF auctions over the longer term.  We probably cant really do that in a normal environment with a penalty rate.  If you think of the transition on the TAF, wed have to move to a penalty rate, and then later on, as we go to the sporadic auctions, wed actually have to lower the rate again.  That just seems a little confusing to me.  But my main concern is the signal in terms of monetary policy that people might draw from raising the rate. On the LSAP, I dont feel very defensive about what weve been doing.  After all, we did get a really good mortgage refinancing wavethat was the point of the exercise.  Its hard to 
   know how much of it was MBS versus Treasuries, and well never really know for certain.  But I feel pretty good about basically having achieved that objective. In terms of Treasuries, I dont think theres any appetite for going much larger.  I think the choice is really between standing pat and going to, as President Yellen said, $450 billion and extending it through year-end. The advantage of the latter is that you dont have to make up your mind quite so soon, but the disadvantage is that it seems like a pretty weak response.  It shows a lack of sort of confidence in what the Fed is doing with this facility.  So I guess Im slightly leaning toward standing pat, because I worry that the other option would be viewed as too little to be significant. I think the suggestion about hybrid ARMs makes a lot of sense.  In some ways, if we dont do that, were basically distorting the relationship between the fixed-rate agency MBS and the hybrid ARMs, and its not really clear why we would want to do that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE. Thank you. On the question of extensions and modifications on liquidity facilities, Im generally in favor of the proposal, but I wonder if one option might be to raise the minimum rate for TAF at the same time we increase the spread on the primary credit, so that wed be treating the two different types of borrowers the same way. On the exit strategies, it strikes me that the whole discussion is incredibly similar to a normal exercise in asset-liability management that goes on in banks all the time and that we should probably be paying attention to the same kind of tools that are used in banks to simulate various possibilities. Regarding these tools, I dont think theyre mutually exclusive, so some modeling of an optimum mixa funding mix if you willof all of the various tools, taking into account some of the different barriers that we might run into in different markets, might make some sense. 
    Also, Id be interested in some sort of regular reporting, whether it is in Notes or the Bluebook or one of the other books, so that we keep an eye on the potential costs of the exit strategies in a number of different environments.  As a banker, I have been in a situation where I have looked into the future and have seen losses that would arise from unwinding positions that I had taken. Of course, at that time, I was never able to adjust my cost of funds absolutely.  [Laughter] So it occurs to me this could involve an incredibly magnified political risk.  Theres a huge temptation not to take those losses when the risk associated with taking the losses is very high. So we need to make sure that were paying attention to those costs, particularly if they would bring us under political pressure at the same time that were doing something thats politically unpopular to begin with.  So, again, I think modeling those out is important.   I guess the statement that struck me the most is that the banking organizations have not discussed with System staff the possible effects of increased Systemwide reserves.  I havent seen any indication that anybody anywhere in the banking industry has thought about the implications of these very high reserves in the system.  Ive been trying to think what that effect might be, and, frankly, I dont know.  But it strikes me that this level of reserves is going to have some sort of effect, so we should start to think about that, too.  Hopefully, some of our researchers can come up with some possible impacts. Finally, on flexibility, Im probably, again, headed dangerously close to the policy round discussion. When we first started these programs, I wasnt entirely sure how much we would need, so it strikes me that, if a given purchase amount is beginning to impair functioning in any market that we are in, we have to wonder if that purchase amount minus one is also doing anything positive in that market.  That would seem to indicate that certainly were getting close 
 to an exit for agency debt. And I wonder, as originations go down, whether we end up in the same place with the MBS.  Those are my comments, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. I agree with Brians recommendations.  In terms of the TAF option of raising the minimum bid rate, I come out where Governor Kohn does.  There are several large institutions that are borrowing heavily from the TAF that are just holding them as excess reserves. I think having a 10 basis point charge and making it a little bit costly actually does make sense; it will probably bring down the TAF borrowing somewhat, which, given the size of 
our balance sheet, probably also makes sense. In terms of the tools for exit, I agree with virtually everything that President Yellen said, so Im not going to repeat it.  In terms of the asset purchase strategy, we dont need to buy $1 trillion just for market function and liquidity in mortgage-backed securities.  We werent trying to set interest rates, but we were certainly trying to influence interest rates.  Theres no reason to do something of that 
magnitude unless were going to influence interest rates.  So I do think that theres still a little bit of difference around the table about exactly what we think these programs are intended to do.  But we made a distinction between quantitative easing and the asset side of the balance sheet.  To me, that meant that were trying to get the financing costs lower. Its hard to break this out from the discussion for tomorrow.  But if were not happy with where we are on our dual mandate, this is the only tool we have.  And the way it operates has to be through the cost of financing. So, its a topic for discussion for tomorrow, but I think we have to make that link.  
We cant talk about it separately. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. President Bullard. 
  MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a few quick comments.  I agree with all the points in the Madigan memo.  I think it does recognize what is happening with our liquidity facilities. I have advocated before that we get them all priced as backstops and not that they actually need to be used at every point in time.  I would also announce a rescission date for GSE lending. Couldnt we make that February 1, 2010, as well? That would push it off into the future and would line it up with the other dates as opposed to doing it immediately.  I would go ahead and raise the minimum bid rate.  I dont feel strongly on that.  I guess I come out where Governor Kohn and President Fisher have. My thinking on that was that we could encourage more-normal market functioning there.  Vice Chairman Dudley brings up a good point, namely, that it sounds like raising an interest rate.  I think thats a communication issue, and that would have to be handled appropriately. On the issues related to exiting, my overall reading is that there are some very promising but unproven ideas here, mostly to do with interest on reserves and reverse repos.  We think theyll work, but at this point theyre not really proven.  I guess Im reluctant to go further with asset purchases without more concrete ideas on how well manage this going forward, although I do admit that these are promising. The current policy response to the crisis has been to lower nominal interest rates to zero and more than double the monetary base.  I think this discussion indicates that that increase in the monetary base will be very persistent, which is unprecedented in post-war U.S. history.  I am worried that we dont really know what the implications of that might be, and we dont really have tools in place to manage that.  So were not really exiting from that increase in the base, were just saying: That was our response. Were going to more than double the monetary base, and were going to see what happens. 
  On asset purchases strategy, Id be fine with the tapering off.  I dont feel really strongly on that. I think if we stick with our dates, the exit might go fine on the Treasuries. In the current environment of large fiscal deficits, as several people have mentioned, including Governor Kohn, theres always going to be talk about monetizing the debt.  I just dont think we can get away from it in this environment.  Anything we do that smacks of buying up more Treasuries is going to be problematic.  So even though I have advocated in the past for treating MBS and Treasuries and debt all as one package and letting the Desk manage it, now I think it may not be the best thing to do. Im also sympathetic with President Rosengren, who spoke earlier this afternoon about a state-contingent reaction function.  I have advocated for this before here, and though I know we are a long way from that, thats really what you want.  You want to be able to communicate to the public that if the data come in a little bit worse, then were going to do a little bit more, and if the data come in a little bit better, were going to do a little bit less. Thats the kind of thing that you want. You have that in something like a Taylor Rule for interest rate policy.  Youd like that for asset purchases. We just havent been able to formulate something like that.  Id like to encourage us to keep thinking in that direction.  After all, zero interest rates might go on for several years, so its not as if this situation is about to end.  So I think we should still keep thinking about that, but I know that were a long way from that at this point.  Thank you very much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support Brians recommendations on our credit and liquidity facilities.  In regards to tools for exiting, I am also very appreciative to the staff for the excellent work that they did.  I am now more confident that we have the tools.  I 
 am also very much in favor of using the Monetary Policy Report to describe the tools that are available to us. And I prefer focusing on those tools that we currently have available to us that dont require any legislation or other changes. I also agree with Governor Kohns comments that its too soon to consider a change in policy, but I also agree that its not too soon for the Committee to start talking about a frameworkor the process that were going to be usingto decide how we are going to apply these tools. In addition, I think it would be helpful for the staff and this Committee to start looking at some alternative language for use in statements that will describe this environment that we are going to be in, where we are simultaneously adjusting our fed funds target and managing the size 
of our balance sheet. As President Yellen stated, I think that getting prepared to communicate is just as important as getting ready to use the tools.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill start with our instructions to the Desk on asset purchases. I agree with Governor Kohn, and I was going to express it the same wayfor clarity of instructions, fixing a price or fixing a quantity really cant be beat.  I agree with President Bullard that a reaction function would be preferable on some grounds, and if we were able to communicate a well-understood one, that would be great.  But in this instance I just dont think we have the time to communicate that in a way that does not add uncertainty about the exact way in which were likely to react to incoming data.  Moreover, I want to emphasize that I think we should give the Desk less discretion, and I do that without any lack of respect for the tremendous acumen and skill of the people on the Desk.  Its just that it places an impossible burden on them to operationalize our terms of art in the directive and to communicate that 
  coherently to markets in a way that doesnt add chatter that we dont need and that distracts us from what were doing. As for monetizing debt, were monetizing mortgage-backed securities just as much as were monetizing debt.  I think the dangerand this has been the danger this springis conveying that the amount we monetize might vary with the amount the government issues.  Thats something we have to stay away from, and its another reason not to go down the path of seeking to adopt a kind of a reaction function that tries to skin a bunch of cats. As to our exit strategy, I think were likely to be in this situation with zero interest rates for a while. But I have a hard time ruling out the possibility that, if the Greenbooks expectation comes true, towards the end of the year there will be another gigantic sigh of relief, much as we experienced after the bottom in Marchmaybe not euphoria, but a turn in expectations and sentiment that makes the world look different and makes us at least want to think about backing away from stimulus before the end of the year.  I have no idea how likely that is, but I think we need to pay attention to the amount of stimulus were providing and the effects were having.  I 
think we need to pay attention to the banking system, in particular, and to monitor bank asset 
holdings and their liquid liabilities and that channel for policy.  Sure, we were intervening in order to reduce MBS rates and to reduce Treasury yields below what they otherwise would have been. Granting that, its not clear which of those two channels had the bigger effect.  But we need to be thinking about the timingwhat its going to look like when its going to be the right 
time. I think that its too early to signal that were thinking about exiting, but its not too early to explain in the Monetary Policy Report that we are thinking about what it would be like.  Were not thinking about doing it yet, but were planning and thinking carefully about the 
  mechanics of it.  I think that raising the interest rate on reserves seems quite likely to succeed.  To my mind, the most logical and natural path forward on this issue of reserve management is to use this opportunity to back away from federal funds rate targeting.  Weve backed away from nonborrowed reserves targeting. If historically, by some fluke, we had been targeting RP rates over the last three decades, I dont think we would have known the difference, and yet RP rates never equaled the fed funds rate. So I dont think we have a real strong reason to tie ourselves to the federal funds rate as opposed to the RP rate. The interest rate on reserves in this regime is going to be the relevant marginal rate for banks.  So when the time comes, I think we just back away from the target, explain that, heres our policy rate, the interest on reserves, and let it go at that. As a resultand this is sort of relatedI think we should be really hesitant to engage in clever tinkering to try to get around problems with this, as good as we seem to have been at clever tinkering recently. So to my mind, reserve collateral accounts are just not worth the bother. In terms of changing the leverage ratio and exempting some institutions, I dont think we should tinker with supervision and regulation just to solve a monetary policy problem.  I find the guidance thing to be even murkier. Im against Fed bills.  I dont want us to have that ability.  I dont want to make us a target for those who would want us to finance stuff.  Weve gotten involved in housing finance, and I think one of our biggest political problems in the next couple of years is going to be backing away from housing finance, the way we had to back away from it in the 1970s.  That 
transition out, I think, would be made more difficult if we have this off-balance-sheet thing.  I was stunned to learn in the staff memos that if this had full faith and credit, our books would be consolidated with the U.S. government.  To me, that has some optical characteristics that I think 
  are dangerous for us as an institution.  Wed be seen as on balance sheet and yet outside of appropriations. So I just dont think we should go down that road. Hybrid ARMsagain, sort of clever tinkering. For us to go to these little markets and kind of try to pick up some effect just opens us to rent-seeking.  Maybe weve gotten good at handling it, but it just doesnt seem worth it to me. As for the facilities, I would have terminated them all.  [Laughter] I wouldnt have initiated any of them anyway, but given the Boards decision, Im willing to go along with the foreign central bank swap arrangement.  But let me say about rescinding the GSE facility that I am wildly enthusiastic.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Ill help you with your time, Mr. Chairman.  Everything I believe has already been said by one person or another. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I thank you. Just very quickly, let me summarize a few things. I think there was a lot of support for Brians recommendations.  The only issue I heard was some discussion about raising the bid rate on the TAF.  You can raise the rate by cutting the quantity or by raising the rate. I think the optics are a little bit risky to be raising the rate.  I would be inclined to go with the recommendation that the staff has put forward. On the exit strategy, I guess I disagree with President Lacker.  I think its important for us to have these other tools to diversify our ability to sterilize reserves.  A number of things are very interestingreverse repos, collateralized lending, term deposits.  And we didnt talk about redemptions, but redemptions actually are part of this, too.  Thats going to be significant over the next couple of years. I think most people agree that it would be very valuable to have as 
    detailed as possible a discussion of the exit strategy in the Monetary Policy Report.  And I think there was good support for that, and we should proceed with that. Finally, on the Desk and flexibility, there didnt seem to be much interest in giving you a great deal of flexibility.  [Laughter]  But I want to make a couple of points.  One is, clearly, we dont want purchases to be counterproductive, so if you are overwhelming the market, or something like that, you should either adjust or let the Committee know about it.  I think there was also a good bit of interest in your promoting liquidity and, in that respect, considering off-the-run securities, things of that sort. But I personally also would support lending securities.  I think that just adds to the liquidity in the market.  Well talk more tomorrow about asset purchases as a strategy, and so on. Let me just say to President Plosser and President Lacker, that we should close the GSE lending authority. It turned out to be an inconvenient moment, but we will do that as soon as we can find an appropriate time.  Anything else? MR. TARULLO. Mr. Chairman, I think we should say for the record that Brian should draw no negative inferences from the fact that at his very first meeting President Lacker suggests that we should withdraw discretion from the Desk.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let that be noted. This is the latest weve ever ratified the open market operations, Im sure, in the history of the Federal Reserve.  If there are no other 
comments, we need to take a few votes. First, by the FOMC to ratify domestic open market 
operations. MR. KOHN. So move. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any objections? [No response]  Thank you. Next, by the FOMC to modify the authorization to allow the lending of agency debt.  Are there those who 
 would like to be recorded in opposition to that? No?  Without objection.  Thank you. The remaining votes are on the program extensions or modifications.   MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, could I recommend one change to the recommended resolutions?  The draft that was circulated indicated that the New York Fed is directed to suspend operations of the TSLF options program.  I recommend substituting to suspend auctions under the TSLF options program.  The reason for the change is that there are options outstanding, and I dont think the intent would be to prevent those options from being exercised. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Noted. Thank you. We need a motion to extend the swap agreements. MR. KOHN. So move. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is there anyone who objects? [No response] Okay. The FOMC needs to extend the TSLF until February 1, understanding that the schedule 1 auctions will be suspended and the schedule 2 auctions reduced in size and that the options program will be suspended along the lines that Brian mentioned. MR. KOHN. So move. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any objection, concerns? Seeing none, okay. For the Board, we are asked to extend the AMLF, the commercial paper funding facility, the primary dealer credit facility, and the TSLF.  This includes the additional restrictions on the AMLF, 
which Boston will take care of, the reduced offerings under the TSLF, and the tightening of 
collateral conditions for the primary dealer credit facility.  And we will not extend the MMIFF, the money market facility.  Brian? 
                                                     6 The materials used by Messrs. Kiley and Sheets are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).        MR. MADIGAN. Just one additional point. On the tightening of the collateral restrictions, its likely that that will not be implemented immediately but some time in the next several months. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. That will be clear in the statement tomorrow?  Yes, okay. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any objection from the Board? Seeing none. Finally, from the Board, the resolution to scale back the TAF according to the schedule that Brian suggested.  Seeing no objection. Thank you very much.  Again, well provide you with a press release as soon as possible, and it will go out on Thursday, at noon, I believe. Let us go on now to the staff presentation on the economy.  Michael Kiley and Nathan Sheets will make the presentation.  Whenever you are ready. MR. KILEY.6  I will be referring to the materials that were just distributed.  Recent data suggest that economic activity has continued to contract, but at a more moderate pace than the breathtaking declines registered around the turn of the year. As shown in the top left panel of your first exhibit, job losses remained sizable through May, albeit smaller than those recorded earlier in the year; despite the moderation in job losses, the unemployment rate jumped another  percentage point last month, to 9.4 percent. In manufacturing, the rate of decline of industrial production (shown in the top right panel) has lessened somewhat in recent months, with the moderation in production cuts broad-based. We expect that real GDP will rise a bit in the third quarter.  While the most significant factor behind the expected near-term pickup is the progress firms especially automakers have made on adjusting inventories (a topic I will return to shortly), the stabilization in household demand since late last year also plays an important role.  As shown in the middle left panel, real consumer spending has been roughly stable since January.  The stabilization in household demand is also apparent in the housing market.  As shown in the middle right panel, sales of existing homes 
             through May, released earlier today, and sales of new homes through April have been roughly flat since late last year.   In contrast to the stabilization in household demand, recent data suggest that business outlays have continued to contract.  As shown in the bottom left, shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft (the red line) continued to trend down through April. And, with new orders well below shipments, we expect further near-term declines.  We will receive information on orders and shipments through May 
tomorrow morning. As shown to the right, we expect real GDP to fall at an annual rate of 1 percent this quarter, and to rise  percent in the third quarter. The top panel of exhibit 2 lists some of the key factors shaping our medium-term outlook. The outlook for inventories drives much of the contour over the second half of this year. As shown by the blue bars in the middle left panel, firms efforts to trim 
bloated inventories in the first half of the year were a sizable drag on GDP.  In the second half, the slowing in the rate of liquidation provides an arithmetic boost to GDP growth. Next year, as inventories come into better balance, the advance in GDP is driven primarily by final sales. Returning to the box at the top, several factors shape our expectation that final demand will begin to improve next year.  First, the stabilization in the housing market brings about an end to the drag from residential investment by early next year, and we expect housing construction to turn up modestly thereafter. More broadly, we expect risk premiums on corporate bonds and equities to decline further, which, in conjunction with the declines we have already seen and support from monetary policy, contribute to gains in household wealth and a lower cost of capital. The middle right panel provides some perspective on the impact of wealth on household outlays: The declines in household wealth associated with falling house and equity prices are estimated to have placed a substantial drag on consumption expenditures both last year and this year. We expect this drag to ebb by a percentage point next year, which, in conjunction with improved access to credit and the effect of stabilization in the labor market on household incomes, helps consumption expenditures to advance 2 percent in 2010. The bottom left panel presents the familiar accelerator mechanism, where business fixed investment as a share of output (shown in red) tends to track, with a lag, the growth rate of output (shown in black).  We expect the deceleration in output over the past year to damp business investment through early next year; thereafter, equipment and software spending is expected to pick up.  However, spending on nonresidential structures is likely to continue to decline for some time, reflecting high vacancy rates, falling prices of commercial real estate, and persistently tight credit conditions in that sector. 
            Putting the pieces together, we project that real GDP will advance a bit more than 1 percent at an annual rate over the second half of this year and about 3 percent next year, both higher than in the April Greenbook.  The somewhat faster pace of growth relative to April reflects the positive effects of lower risk premiums on corporate debt and equity, a lower exchange value of the dollar, and a modestly better outlook for foreign activity, which together outweigh the heightened drag from higher mortgage rates and oil prices. Your next exhibit summarizes the inflation outlook.  The readings on core PCE price inflation in March and April averaged  percent; these gains were boosted by the response of producers to the increase in federal excise taxes on tobacco.  Given the news in the May CPI report, we estimate that core PCE prices advanced a more moderate 0.1 percent in May. Turning to the panel at the right, we project the unemployment rate to rise to 10 percent by the end of this year and to edge down a bit in the second half of 2010.  We have also boosted our estimate of the NAIRU a touch, to 5 percent, reflecting the accumulation of evidence that the high rates of permanent job losses in this recession will raise the level of frictional unemployment for a time. Our energy price forecast is shown in the middle left panel.  With the price of oil projected to be about $15 a barrel higher, on average, over the projection period, we anticipate somewhat more acceleration in energy prices through the middle of next year than in the previous projection. Finally, we expect core import price inflation (shown at the middle right) to pick up over the second half of this year, reflecting, in part, the run up in non-oil commodity prices and the decline in the exchange value of the dollar. As shown by the green line in the bottom panel, we expect overall PCE inflation to slow from 1.4 percent this year to 1.1 percent in 2010.  Core inflation is projected to slow a bit more.  The projected deceleration in core inflation reflects the substantial drag induced by economic slack. Given the central role of economic slack in our projection, the next exhibit discusses uncertainty regarding our estimates of resource utilization. The upper two panels focus on the differences in the degree of slack signaled by our current estimates of the output gap and the unemployment gapthat is, the deviation of the unemployment rate from the staff estimate of the NAIRU.  The panel to the left plots the output gap (the black line) and the unemployment gap (the red line, plotted on an inverted scale). As highlighted to the right, the output and unemployment gaps typically provide similar signals; this similarity is largely by construction, as we use information from developments in both product and labor 
markets to jointly inform our estimates of potential GDP and the NAIRU.  However, 
     a sizable discrepancy has opened up during this recessionwith the unemployment gap suggesting an even greater degree of slack than suggested by the output gap.   In the Greenbook, we highlighted several possible explanations for the discrepancy. First, the GDP data, as currently published, may understate the contraction in real activity; indeed, the data on Gross Domestic Income, which in principle estimate overall economic activity as does GDP, have been significantly weaker than GDP since 2007. Second, labor force participation may currently be boosted to an unusual degree by the Extended Unemployment Compensation (or EUC) program, by the declines in wealth and their effect on the labor supply of near-retirees or other workers, or by other factors, such as an unusual concentration of job losses among individuals with strong labor force attachment; such unusual boosts to participation would have a large influence on the unemployment gap but not much effect on the estimated GDP gap.  Finally, we may currently have underestimated the 
size of shifts in the NAIRU or other elements of potential, possibly contributing to mismeasurement of slack. Indeed, we often change our estimate of output gaps with hindsight.  The panel at the middle left shows how our current estimates of the output gap (the black line) 
differ from the initial estimates we made over the history of the last 20 years (the green line); such differences may reflect revisions to data, changes in the staffs methodology, and the fact that underlying trends are more easily detected looking backward than looking forward.  Nonetheless, the revisions over the past two decades are not especially large: The root-mean-squared error from the initial to current estimate is less than one percentage point over this period.  This size of revision is 
much smaller than that found in some academic studies that focused on the 1970s or early 1980s. Another way to assess uncertainty regarding resource utilization is to compare estimates of slack derived from different methods.  As highlighted in the box at the middle right, different methods will imply different estimates of potential GDP.  I consider estimates from three methods.  The first is the staff estimate, which is 
loosely based on a growth accounting approach along with a number of underlying models (related to productivity dynamics, Okuns law, and the Phillips curve, for 
example).  The second is a trend-cycle decomposition of GDP using a simple Phillips 
curve in which inflation is a function of the output gap, a model that has been used in many academic studies.  The third is derived from a dynamic stochastic general 
equilibrium (or DSGE) model developed at the Board.  This model, called EDO for Estimated, Dynamic, Optimization-based model, consists of a set of equations for the spending, production, and wage and price decisions of households and firms that are 
derived from utility- and profit-maximization under model-consistent expectations.  The bottom panel presents the range of estimates generated by these methods, the 90 percent confidence interval around this range, and the staffs estimate of the output gap. Three points are apparent. First, uncertainty is significant: the 90 percent confidence interval for the second quarter of this year spans from about -2 percent of 
         potential GDP to about -8 percent of potential GDP.  Second, the staffs estimate of the output gap is in the lower half of the confidence interval, but it is not the most negative estimate; the estimate from the DSGE model is more negative, at a bit 
below -7 percent. Finally, the entire confidence interval for the output gap is below zero, by the largest margin seen over the past two decades.  In summary, it seems highly likely that the economy currently is operating with considerable slack. Your final exhibit focuses on two other risks to the inflation outlook.  As discussed in the top left box and shown in the upper right, long-run inflation expectations have been reasonably well anchored for some time.  In our projection, this prevents a sharper deceleration in inflation.  However, an unmooring of expectations is a risk:  For example, expectations could shift down markedly in response to the weak economy and decelerating wage gains; alternatively, expectations could ramp up, perhaps in response to our expanding balance sheet. Another important risk surrounding our inflation projection relates to the links between resource utilization and inflation, discussed in the middle panels.  Inflation appears less sensitive to resource utilization than in the past; for example, the middle right panel presents estimates of the slope of a simple Phillips curve using rolling 20-year samples; these show a lower sensitivity of inflation to utilization in the most recent data.  This apparent reduction in sensitivity is one factor that contributed to our projection that inflation will decelerate by less than it did during earlier periods of substantial slack.  But it is possible that the recent data are leading us astray, because reliable identification of the slope of the Phillips curve may require large movements in utilization. The post-2003 estimates plotted in the chart are based on sample periods that exclude the early 1980s, and they may not be a reliable guide now that we have reentered a period of high unemployment.  If the effect of utilization on inflation were similar to that apparent during the early 1980s disinflation, we could see deflation. The bottom panels illustrate these risks using two alternative simulations from the Greenbook. In the first, we assume that long-run inflation expectations (corresponding to the PCE price index) rise 1 percentage point, to 3 percent, by early 
next year. This increase becomes partially self-fulfilling, and core PCE inflation averages 1 percent in 2010 and then climbs steadily, reaching 2 percent by 2013.  
Given the stronger price outlook, the federal funds rate lifts off from zero a year earlier than in the baseline.   The second simulation (labeled deflation) assumes an effect of slack on inflation and an accelerationist structure to the Phillips curve more consistent with models estimated over sample periods including the 1970s and early 1980s.  As a result, core prices are flat or falling through 2011, and only rising slowly thereafter. MR. SHEETS. Although a wide array of asset prices plays a role in our forecast, the dollar holds a special place in the hearts of those of us in the International Finance 
Division. As shown in the top left panel, the broad real dollar has moved down 
           significantly since its peak in March.  As displayed in the middle panel, the dollar has posted large declines in recent months against many currencies of the advanced foreign economies, or AFEs.  The dollar has also depreciated significantly against emerging market, or EME, currencies (shown on the right), which has prompted a number of these countries, including Brazil, Russia, and several in emerging Asia, to intervene in foreign exchange markets to temper the pace of their currencys rebound. Notably, however, the dollar has essentially moved sideways since the U.S. payrolls release on June 5, as the less-grim-than-expected report pushed up the path of short-term U.S. interest rates relative to those abroad. Although the dollar has declined substantially over the past few months, it still has not reversed the sharp rise posted in the second half of 2008 and early this year, as financial market participants sought refuge in U.S. Treasuries.  We believe that the primary reason for the dollars recent depreciation is an unwinding of this flight to safety, partly predicated on an improving outlook for the global economy.  The marked rebound in some previously distressed EME currencies is consistent with this hypothesis. In addition, as shown in the middle left, the spreads on BBB corporate bonds have declined, most steeply in the United States, but elsewhere as well.  And global equity prices (shown on the middle right), despite retreating some in recent sessions, have rebounded significantly on balance in recent months.  In addition to an increase in risk appetite, some currenciessuch as the Canadian and Australian dollars and the Brazilian realhave been supported by a rise in commodity prices. The spot price of WTI oil (the black line in the bottom left panel) has jumped to nearly $70 per barrel, up $15 per barrel since your last meeting, and nonfuel commodity prices have increased about 10 percent on average.  These rises seem to signal an incipient increase in the demand for commodities, in light of recentand expected futureimprovements in global economic conditions.  
Notably, the International Energy Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy have 
revised up their forecasts of global oil demand.  And, as shown on the bottom right, the Baltic Dry Indexa measure of bulk shipping rateshas recently moved up, in line with a rebound in Chinese purchases of iron ore and other commodities. Some market commentary has also linked the dollars recent decline to concerns about the U.S. fiscal outlook and the extent of Treasury issuance.  As seen in the first panel of your next exhibit, U.S. Treasury yields have recently moved up more than sovereign yields abroad, but we see this difference as largely reflecting an unwinding of flight-to-safety flows. Moreover, although sovereign CDS premiums (the top right panel) have increased some of late, they have not risen disproportionately in the United States relative to other countries.  Indeed, the dollar continued to depreciate against the pound even after the United Kingdom was put on a credit watch by S&P 
in mid-May.  Other observers have attributed the dollars decline to anxieties about future U.S. inflation, but it is difficult to square this view with various measures of 
inflation expectations, which seem reasonably well anchoredas Michael Kiley has shown. 
         Your next panels focus on the U.S. external sector.  As shown in the table, we see net exports adding about 1 percentage point to U.S. economic growth in the current quarter, with the decline in imports continuing to outpace that of exports.  Thereafter, net exports should subtract about  percentage point from growth in the second half of this year and a  percentage point in 2010, as the recovery of imports is seen to be somewhat stronger than that of exports.   The relative strength of imports reflects several factors.  First, notwithstanding the dollars recent depreciation, it is still up about 10 percent over the past year.  In light of the long lags in our trade equations, the exchange rate is likely to be a net source of stimulus for imports and drag on exports for some time.  In addition, as shown on the right, with U.S. and foreign GDP growth expected to proceed at roughly comparable paces through the forecast period, the persistently higher income elasticity of U.S. importsthe so-called Houthakker-Magee asymmetryshould also boost import growth relative to export growth. As seen in the bottom left panel, the current account deficit in the first quarter narrowed to less than 3 percent of GDP, the lowest reading in a decade.  However, our forecast calls for the deficit to widen again, to about 4 percent of GDP by the end of next year. In addition to the relative strength of real imports, which I just discussed, the run-up in oil prices plays a key role in this projection.  As shown on the right panel, the oil import balancewhich had improved by $300 billion in recent quartersis poised to deteriorate.        Your next exhibit examines the outlook for foreign activity.  Aggregate GDP growth abroad (line 1 of the table) contracted at an 8 percent annual rate in the first quarter, the sharpest decline on record.  But recent data have signaled that the pace of contraction slowed significantly in the second quarter and, indeed, have prompted us to mark up our forecast.  We now expect foreign growth to rise to roughly 1 percent during the second half of this year and to around 3 percent in 2010.  The recovery is expected to be rather lackluster, as households and firms around the globe remain conservative in their spending decisions and the flow of credit remains anemic as financial institutions repair their balance sheets.   In the advanced foreign economies, recent survey data, such as purchasing managers indexes, are well off their recent lows and are now close to levels that signal a stabilization of activity.  In addition, a few pieces of so-called hard data for these countries, including retail sales (the right panel) and industrial production (not shown), seem to be flattening out. Consistent with these admittedly fledgling signs of stabilization, our forecast for the AFEs (line 3 in the table) calls for economic growth to rise slowly from the first quarters 7 percent plunge to roughly zero in the second half of this year and to nearly 2 percent next year.  This forecast is a few tenths higher than in April, in line with recent data and the improvement in financial conditions.  The trajectory of our forecast is also helped by a swing in the contribution from inventories in some 
     countries, as firms have quickly drawn down their stocks in recent quarters.  Monetary policy is another supportive factor.  As you know, central banks in these economies have cut rates to very low levels and are implementing unconventional policy measures in an effort to stimulate economic activity. Fiscal stimulusthe bottom left panelshould also bolster activity this year.  But the fiscal boost falls off markedly next year in the AFEs, highlighting a risk that their recoveries may stall if a rebound in private demand is not well entrenched.  Moreover, labor market conditions in these economies are likely to worsen for a while. The middle panel shows projections of unemployment rates for the foreign economies from a simple model that regresses the unemployment rate on GDP 
growth and lags of both variables. This framework indicates that unemployment rates abroad are likely to continue rising until well into 2010 or even later, and European policymakers themselves have expressed deep concerns about the near-term 
trajectory of the labor market. Consistent with these observations, our forecast sees activity in the advanced foreign economies remaining quite soft, with their output gaps (the right panel) only stabilizing next year and generally lagging the U.S. recovery. As shown in the table at the top of your next exhibit, GDP in the emerging market economies (line 1) plunged at a 9 percent rate in the first quarter, including a 21 percent drop in Mexico (line 4). GDP in these economies is projected to decline slightly in the current quarter and then gradually accelerate, with growth reaching 4 percent in 2010. This recovery is supported by a projected further recovery in 
capital flows, continued stimulus from macroeconomic policies, and strengthening 
global demand.  The Mexican economy again contracted sharply in the second quarter, depressed by the flu outbreak, but we see those effects as being quickly reversed. The EMEs are showing some marked signs of improvement, especially China.  As seen in the middle left panel, Chinas PMI has moved up to a reading that our empirical work indicates is consistent with GDP growth of above 5 percent.  As for harder data, the 12-month growth of Chinese retail sales has continued to hold up well, and that of fixed investment has risen to almost 40 percent, fueled by fiscal stimulus and rapid bank lending.  Also, as shown on the right, electricity production and importstwo indicators that had shown marked weaknesshave rebounded vigorously of late. All told, our sense is that the Chinese economy is in the midst of a moderate recovery, but the extent to which China will become an engine of growth for the region, or for the global economy more generally, remains to be seen. In other emerging market economies, signs of stabilization are also becoming more apparent. As in China, PMIs (the bottom left) have bounced back from their lows in a number of emerging Asian and Latin American economies.  Industrial production (the middle panel) has decreased at a slower pace or even moved back up, and retail sales (not shown) have righted themselves.  This strengthening performance 
                                                    7 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 7).         appears to stem in part from an improvement in exports (the right panel), which have bottomed out or rebounded in many EMEs.  Brian Madigan will conclude our presentation. MR. MADIGAN.7  I will be referring to the separate package labeled Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants Economic Projections.   Exhibit 1 tabulates the central tendencies and ranges of your latest projections.  Corresponding information about your April projections is indicated in italics, and June Greenbook projections are included as memo items.   As shown in the upper left portion of the table, your forecasts for real GDP growth in 2009 have a central tendency of -1.5 to -1 percent.  That is an upward shift of about  to  percentage point from April, reflecting increases to your projections for both halves of this year. You indicated that the upward revision was in response to the better tone of the data releases and improvements in financial conditions over the intermeeting period.  Your growth forecasts for 2010 and 2011 are similar to those you provided in April.   Even though you project higher real GDP growth over the near term, all of you raised your forecasts of the unemployment rate.  The central tendency in the fourth quarter of 2009 is now 9.8 to 10.1 percent, about  percentage point above your April projections. You still expect that the unemployment rate will trend down during 2010 
and 2011, but the levels remain about  percentage point above your April projections. Many of you cited recent higher-than-expected unemployment data as the reason for the revisions. Moreover, each of you indicated that the unemployment  rate in the fourth quarter of 2011 is likely to be well above your estimate of the long-run equilibrium unemployment rate.   As shown in the lower half of the table, recent information has led you to raise your forecasts for headline and core inflation from those in April.  The central tendency of your projections for headline PCE inflation in 2009 is 1.0 to 1.4 percent, about  percentage point above that of April, and you made small upward revisions in 2010 and 2011. Many of you noted that these upward revisions reflect the influence of higher-than-expected core inflation data and higher energy prices, and some pointed to higher inflation expectations.  Most of you still project that inflation will stay around or below your view of mandate-consistent inflation through 2011, 
but your expectations for inflation continue to span a wide range.  Some see inflation slowing through 2011 in response to persistently high economic slack, while others see inflation rising above mandate-consistent inflation because of the influence of the rapid expansion of the Federal Reserves balance sheet on inflation expectations.   Over the near term, your views on the outlook are broadly similar to those of the staff. Greenbook projections for real GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation for 
      2009 are within the central tendencies of your projections.  However, by 2011 noticeable differences are evident.  The Greenbooks real GDP growth forecast for that year is above the central tendency of your projections, while the staff forecasts for the unemployment rate and core inflation are below the central tendencies.  Several of you again noted explicitly that you do not share the staffs view of inflation dynamics. That divergence in views helps explain why more than half of you anticipate that it will be necessary to begin moving the fed funds rate up appreciably earlier than envisioned by the Greenbook, which assumes that the federal funds rate will remain 
close to the zero bound through 2011. As shown by the left panels of exhibit 2, your views on the degree of uncertainty surrounding your projections have not changed appreciably since April.  Almost all of you see greater-than-usual uncertainty regarding your projections of both economic growth and inflation, reflecting the unusual nature of the shocks that triggered the current recession and our limited experience with nontraditional policy tools.  
However, as shown in the right-hand panels, more of you now judge that the risks to growth and inflation are roughly balanced.  For economic growth, many of you see the recent economic and financial developments as having reduced downside risks.  Fewer of you now judge that inflation risks are skewed to the downside, and a large majority of you see inflation risks as balanced overall. Mr. Chairman, that concludes our presentation.  But while I have the floor, could I note that I misspoke earlier when I said that the timing of the PDCF haircuts would be announced in the press release on Thursday. Those haircuts arent published, so it wouldnt make sense to put them in the press release.  But the Desk will inform the 
dealers at the appropriate time. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you for the presentation.  Questions for our colleagues?  President Fisher.  MR. FISHER. I just have some questions of Nathan.  You mentioned the Baltic Dry Index in the context of Chinese iron ore imports.  Chinese iron ore imports are far exceeding steel production, as you know. So my question is:  How sustainable, in your opinion, is this recovery?  MR. SHEETS. We have reason to believe that these Chinese purchases are playing a very special role here. What is China doing with all of these commodities that theyre 
purchasing? I think the answer has three parts.  First, some of these commodities are actually 
 being consumed by Chinese firms in association with the fiscal stimulus thats being put in place.  Second, some are being used to replenish inventory levels.  In the fall, when the Chinese and global economy hit something of a wall, many firms just backed away entirely from commodity purchases, and that is one of the reasons why the bottom fell out of the commodity market.  So those inventory levels are low, and theyre being brought back to normal levels.  Third, I think that there is some strategic purchasing going on in the Chinese economy right now.  Commodities are cheap, and theyre pretty confident that at some point theyre going to need to use them, so theyre buying things and stockpiling them. My sense is that, of those three causes, the first one is indicative of early stages of a recovery in the Chinese economy.  I think thats probably sustainable.  These inventory-based explanations are less sustainable, so it wouldnt surprise me if, over time, Chinese purchases flattened out, or even came back from where they are today.  Now, if that happens in the context of a broader global recovery, less demand for basic materials from China would be offset by increased demand from other countries.  But I think there is a risk that the commodity markets have gotten ahead of themselves and that the Chinese will stop buying at this furious pace, and well see a little bit of unwinding of the increases in commodity prices that weve seen over the last few months. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The PCE energy prices seem to be coming off in the forecast into 2010, while the oil commodity price continues to rise slightly, suggesting its non-oil energy. Can you explain what the thinking is there? MR. KILEY. I think thats mainly just looking at rates of changes versus levels.  Its true that the level in 2010 is picking up, but the rate of change is decelerating, because weve seen a 
    big run-up right now in oil prices, and that will be passed through over the second half of this year. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I just wanted to ask you a question.  Taking note of the extremely large range on the inflation forecast for core PCE, is this outside of historical experience? I dont mean the history of our projectionswe havent been doing it that long. But have we seen this kind of range among professional forecasters, even taking note of 
the fact that they might want to market their forecasts in a particular way because theyve got different jobs than we do?  It seems very large, and, frankly, it challenges your ability to listen to 
all of the commentary around the room in an even-keeled way, it seems to me.  Well, thats my reactionspeaking of shipping. [Laughter] MR. MADIGAN. I dont know the answer to your question, President Evans, but it is, as I noted in my remarks, fairly striking. MR. STOCKTON.  Just relative to the Greenbook stochastic simulations or the confidence intervals, even that wide range in 2011 is within the 70 percent confidence interval of the forecast.  So its a sad statement on forecasting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. FOMC are not sheep.  [Laughter] President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question. I appreciate the discussion about measures of slack and output gaps, and I was particularly struck by the measures that were produced by the EDO model.  In the Bluebook, your description of the 
construction of the output gap is not the way I normally think of itit looks like some long-run trend or steady-state model.  Most of these stochastic, general equilibrium models think about equilibrium output being at a point in time, and then you get shocked away from that.  The 
  difference between what might be produced by a sticky price model versus a flexible price model gives you some measure of the difference between whats feasible and what you actually get.  But youve defined the output gap in a much different way, using what looks like some concept of steady state, and I was a little puzzled by that choice.  Of course, in your discussion you highlighted the fact that that actually led to the EDO model having a very large output gap rather than a somewhat smaller one.  Most of these DSGE models lead to much more volatile measures of what you might think of as equilibrium or potential output at a point in time.  If you sort of rethink, then, the range of where potential output might be in terms of what different models give you, I guess I wouldnt have selected that subset, I would have selected a little different subset. MR. KILEY. Right. A lot of that is jargon, terminology.  We were trying to create some definitions that could be consistently applied across many models.  So certainly in our model 
theres a natural rate of output or an equilibrium rate of output that would be consistent with economic efficiency according to that model or with the absence of wage and price rigidities according to that model.  Those two wouldnt necessarily be the same.  But one could have many different definitions of the natural rate of output or the equilibrium rate of output. MR. PLOSSER. Right. It depends on your model. 
MR. KILEY. Weve published papers on using that model and constructing those measures.  Those measures depend upon a set of assumptions regarding certain elements in the 
structure of the economy that many models dont even make assumptions about.  So we couldnt compare that concept with a time-series model, like the trend-cycle decomposition of GDP.  Nor could we compare that necessarily with the staffs estimate; in putting together potential output, the staff takes a long-run growth accounting view and doesnt think about what would happen if, for example, it removed all price and wage rigidities for the economy. 
    We wanted to place all of our models on an equal footing, so we took a very standard definition of potential output for this exercise for the EDO modelthe BeveridgeNelson definition. The model has a representation of the economy that has stochastic trends and unit roots and all of these things in it, and we can crank through all of that machinery and generate a long-run forecast for output, just as you could in a time-series model, or in the FRB/US model, or in basically any model.  We considered that to be a really good thing, because we can actually use the same idea across modelswere not mixing apples and oranges. When we do that in this model, theres a lot of slack right now.  Other models of a similar type could give you a different answerit could be that the natural rate of output gives you a very different answer. So you have to think about why you want to look at all of these concepts, and think about what youre comparing across different models.  This seemed like the simplest way to compare across models. In response to a different question, you might want to use a different concept. MR. PLOSSER. I guess I dont disagree with anything youve just said, except that I think its important to note that the concept of potential output is not model-free.  Therefore, we have to think hard about what this construct looks like.  At some level, youre making some assumptions about what that concept means, and that concept can differ quite a bit across models that one might choose from.  Thats what makes all of this hard in sort of figuring out what the interpretation might be. MR. KILEY. Thats absolutely right, and I just want to clarify one thing.  The definition of potential here is a statistical definition thats consistent with the model.  We didnt say, Okay, were going to use this statistical method for the output gap, and then put it in the model, and a bunch of Phillips curves, or a bunch of other things.  The model is completely 
   independent of that statistical machinery, and wages and prices and everything are being driven by all of the things that are appropriate in a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model.  Its trying to match the data, so when you generate a statistical measure of the output gap from this model, that statistical measure will forecast low inflation, because statistically thats what it thinks happens in the data. That theoretical concept plays no role in the modelits a statistical 
concept. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. The version of the output gap that President Plosser was referring to, as opposed to this other statistical onethats the one that governs inflation dynamics in that model, isnt it? MR. KILEY. No. In a simple three-equation model thats true.  But once you have sticky prices and sticky wages, monopoly power, other sources of distorting shocks, there is no simple relationship between what would happen in the absence of wage and price rigidities and what would happen to inflation. You could write down a modela very simple modelwhere that would be true. But it need not be the case.  MR. LACKER. But that one is related, somehow, in a complicated way, and the one you display is not, right? MR. KILEY. We forecast inflation with the model Ive displayed.  It forecasts very low inflation, because the output gap is so big. Thats not a behavioral relationship, thats a statistical regularity. MR. LACKER. Well, wait.  I thought you said the model stood apart.  What does this gap measured from EDO have to do with inflation dynamics in the model? 
  MR. KILEY. In the model, it doesnt.  But the model is trying to capture the data.  You can simulate the model a million times, generate data, and then regress anything against anything and you find reduced-form relationships. The reduced-form relationships, consistent with the model and the data, are that output gaps predict low inflation.  And thats a reduced-form characteristic of the model that comes from its structure.  Its a pretty big and complicated model, as many are these days. But, because it tries to capture the data, and because it looks like thats a regularity in the data, its generating that prediction. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? [No response]  All right. Thank you for a very productive discussion. Dinner tonight is purely social at the British Embassy at 7:30.  Well begin tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. with the go-round. [Meeting recessed] 
                                                     8 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). June 24, 2009Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I think we have a report on some data from Dave Stockton. MR. STOCKTON.8 Yes. First, Mr. Chairman, I think yesterday I broke my own record.  I said one thing at the meeting, and it was wrong.  [Laughter] I would like to correct that. In response to President Evanss observation about the wide dispersion of the inflation forecast in 2011, I think I said that the range of those forecasts was within the 70 percent confidence interval that we generate using stochastic stimulations.  That, in fact, isnt right.  The range for total PCE prices is just outside the 70 percent confidence interval, and the range for core PCE prices is even further outside the 70 percent confidence interval and, in fact, reaches the 90 percent confidence interval. So there is an unusually wide range of forecasts out there. As for the data, we received the advanced durables this morningI think you should have the table in front of youand it was a stronger-than-expected report.  Shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraftthe bolded figuresrose 0.3 percent in May; we had actually been expecting shipments to decline about 1 percent.  And orders rose more strongly, 4.8 percent, which is a pretty solid increase, pointing to a little bit less weakness going forward in capital spending than wed been expecting.  Now, it is still the case that orders remain well below shipments and that overall equipment spending is still contracting, but I think wed view these data as at least being supportive of our view that the pace of that contraction in equipment spending is lessening.  Were going to get new home sales data later this morning.  We dont have those yet. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Well begin our economic go-round with President Plosser.  
  MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Good morning.  Business conditions in the Third District remained relatively soft in May and early June.  Nevertheless, the steepness of the decline appears to have eased rather dramatically, and the tone from our business contacts has noticeably improved. While our contacts dont expect a strong upturn in business activity, they clearly see signs of stabilization in the near term. The most positive indicator from our Business Outlook Survey, which was released last week, is manufacturing, and that index said that general activity improved from a minus 22.6 in May to a minus 2.2 percent in Junea 20-point swing, which is rather significant as these standards go. This indicates essentially flat activity in the District now.  This is considerably stronger than some of the national industrial production numbers, but consistent with some of the other regional manufacturing surveys.  Our survey has a fairly long historya little longer than Richmonds, I believe, but Im not sure.  [Laughter]  And a movement above zero in this index likely marks the recessions trough, based on past relationships between this index and NBER recession dates.  The future activity index moved up quite sharply in June to levels we havent seen in several years. The most negative factor in the District was the unemployment report.  The unemployment rate in our three states rose another 0.4 percentage point and now stands at 8.4 percent. Payrolls have continued to fall, and, even in our surveys, the employment picture does not look terribly bright. Based primarily on the expected labor market data, Ive revised downward slightly my near-term forecast for 2009 and upped my unemployment rate forecast compared with April.  But I have to confess that my forecast in April was on the outlier side of positive compared with 
many others.  The basic shape of my forecast, however, remains very similar:  A return to 
  positive economic growth in the second half of this year and recovery gaining traction in 2010, picking up to about 3 percent. This is actually similar to the Greenbooks forecast, which has been revised up since our last meeting, so maybe we are converging here at some point.  However, our inflation forecast continued to differ.  I see less deflationary pressures than the Greenbook baseline, and, even with its upward revision to inflation, I see greater risk of higher inflation not in the near term, but in the outyears. I continue to be skeptical of putting too much weight on output gaps as predictors of inflation. My reading of the literature suggests that gaps are difficult to measure with any precision, and this may be one reason that gap measures get little weight in empirical estimations of New Keynesian Phillips curve models.  From the staff discussion yesterday on the range of gap measures, it appears we may have very different perceptions about how to go about constructing the appropriate measure of potential output.  Nevertheless, I think it was interesting.  In fact, the estimates reported yesterday showed a very wide range of views of what the output gap may befrom something like minus 7 or 8 percent to minus 2 or 3 percent.  We view that as being a range of uncertainty about the magnitude of the gap.  In a simple Phillips curve model, that may imply a difference of between 200 and 300 basis points in what a Taylor rule might imply about the fed funds rate.  Thats a pretty large difference in policy stance, so that may suggest very different policies. If we are closer to the smaller measure of the output gap than to the larger measure, it also means that we may have to raise rates sooner than we might think.  In Philadelphias own DSGE forecasting model, we actually get considerably higher inflation pressures going forward than the Greenbook baseline shows, particularly if the fed funds rate stays at zero through 2012.  Given the difficulties in estimating and forecasting inflation, I do think we need to consider 
   alternative forecasts seriously.  With the aggressive monetary policy actions we have taken, I think this means looking at the possibility that our own inflation forecast possesses clear risks to the upside and preparing ourselves and the public for the possibility that we may have to act sooner rather than later. In addition, the size of our balance sheet might complicate our ability to respond as rapidly as necessary to curtail inflation pressures.  And while inflation expectations have so far remained anchored, I think we have to be cognizant of the fact that this might change if agents become convinced that projected fiscal deficits will be monetized or if we fail to act in a timely manner.  For these reasons, I think we should be very cautious of being overly confident that we can leave monetary policy accommodation in place as long as the Greenbook suggests without some very bad consequences on the inflation front. Needless to say, with that perspective in mind, the fed funds rate path embedded in my forecast is considerably steeper than the Greenbooks, which holds rates at zero through 2011.  I believe we will need to begin raising rates by early next year at the latest and throughout the forecast horizon, to at least 3 or 4 percent by the fourth quarter of 2011. I dont believe we can keep the fed funds rate at zero and expect to achieve anything close to our inflation objective or maintain our credibility in achieving that objective over the longer run.  We can say what we please, but it cannot substitute for action.  Our assessment of the output gap will be central to 
how the Committee thinks about the appropriate time to change course and begin to tighten, and we may have to do so in a fairly rapid way.  If we dramatically overestimate the size and persistence of the output gap and wait, we will be too late to stem significant inflation risk. I think we also will need to monitor carefully quantities of various kinds, whether it be bank lending or other measures.  In the past, our operating procedures have constrained reserves deliberately through our control of the fed funds rate and through limiting reserves to the 
   marketplace.  Now those reserves are already out there, in the form of excess reserves in the banking system.  When banks decide its time to start lending again, those reserves can move from excess reserves into bank lending very quickly, and they will not need to be supplied by us as in the old operating regime.  Therefore, I think this transition might be very quickI dont mean days, but certainly over a series of months.  Depending on what we view as the appropriate equilibrium interest rate, our setting for the fed funds rate or the IOER may have to move up quite rapidly, because the opportunity cost of funds in terms of bank lending may move up fairly rapidly in the process. I think were going to face some severe challenges at the turning point when we have to make the decision to move.  It may come sooner than we think, and it may have to be more rapid than we think. I think we have to prepare ourselves for that possibility, and through our communications, prepare the public for that eventuality as well.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to add my thanks to those of President Evans for the improved amplification.  I could hear President Plosser here very well.  [Laughter] In the last two weeks, because of the possible gap between reports of increasingly optimistic sentiment and underlying reality, the Atlanta Bank took great care to collect a lot of input from directors business and financial contacts.  Reports from the business community clearly indicate greater stability. That said, the tone of these reports suggests an economy that is still exceptionally fragile. There is not much optimism among my contacts for a strong recovery.  Business capital spending is being indefinitely postponed, and there is little appetite for hiring, even for seasonal or temporary positions. One Atlanta director, a partner in a top management 
    consulting firm, stated that they are doing very little growth work and that most of their large corporate strategy assignments relate to positioning for subdued business conditions for the next five years. In the financial sector, banks are still very cautious in credit extension.  C&I loan demand remains quite soft, and mortgage demand fell sharply when mortgage rates rose above 5 percent. The outlook I submitted is little changed from late April.  I expect this will be an exceptionally slow recovery. I find the alternative simulations presented in this meetings Greenbook to be quite pertinent. My outlook has elements of the scenarios for both the slower recovery and labor market damage.  In my view, a slow restoration of financial markets will limit 
credit availability well into 2010, and the rebuilding of wealth is likely to be spread over several years. These influences will inhibit the usual forces of recovery.  The significant reorganization of the economy could keep the unemployment rate elevated for years into the recovery. As regards prices, the recent rise in oil and some other commodity prices could raise inflation statistics this summer, but weve also seen downward price pressure elsewhere in the 
data. Overall, Im in the camp that is not overly concerned about inflation for the medium term.  
I continue to think the prospect for deflation is roughly balanced against the likelihood that inflation will accelerate above a rate consistent with price stability.  But even if I am somewhat sanguine about inflation, I acknowledge a high level of uncertainty about the inflation outlook.  I also note that concern about inflation expressed anecdotally on the part of my business contacts is clearly rising; this concern seems to be connected to apprehension about how the Fed will 
manage its balance sheet going forward.  As I see it, the context of our policy discussion involves the potential of a widening separation in public and market sentiment between the expectation of policy reversal and exit and a more uncertain and fragile underlying reality.  I am 
      concerned that too much talk of exit could get ahead of reality.  As several said yesterday, this presents a particularly delicate communication challenge coming out of this meeting.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The reports from my District have revealed lingering concerns about how the economy will evolve over the rest of this year.  Most of my contacts agree that their worst fears for the economy seem less likely to be realized now, but they are still far from optimistic.  Expectations for the remainder of the year varied from further reduction in activity levels to a very moderate resumption in economic growth.  Reports of hiring are still rare, and several contacts from larger companies suggest that they are working on another round of layoffs. From my District vantage point, it still looks like a very gradual recovery process. The inflation picture is mixed.  I am hearing a growing number of contacts expressing fears of inflation driven by rising commodity prices and ballooning fiscal deficits, but I am also hearing widespread reports of downward pressures on wages and benefits.  Synthesizing these reports and the incoming data into an outlook continues to be challenging.  I have revised up slightly my output forecast from the April meeting, as business 
fixed investment, although still a considerable drag on growth, declines less steeply than in my previous outlook. While business spending on equipment is likely to pick up in the second half of the year, spending on structures, as was mentioned yesterday, will probably take longer to 
recover. Some recent favorable readings from the housing indicators have also attenuated the near-term decline in residential investment in my outlook and have raised the prospect for a turnaround in housing in the second half of the year.  My forecast still has the unemployment rate peaking at just over 10 percent in early 2010.  The continued rapid rise in unemployment 
   certainly remains an important drag on the economy as new jobs are hard to find for many of the workers who were laid off. I revised up my inflation forecast for 2009, but I left my longer-term inflation projection on a gradual path towards 2 percent. As we discussed yesterday, the latest Survey of Professional Forecasters has a broader variance around the longer-term inflation trend, but the median inflation projection is largely unchanged.  And, as we said yesterday, we have seen an unusually wide range of inflation projections in this round of the Committees submissions. We know that the liquidity problems in the TIPS market have made that a more difficult indicator to use to deem where inflation expectations are.  We have done some work at the Cleveland Fed using a different method of looking at the TIPS data, and those results suggest that inflation expectations have returned to pre-crisis levels.  Apparently, these results have been confirmed by the staff of the San Francisco Fed, who used a different methodology but came to the same conclusion.  Consequently, although inflation expectations are still volatile, I do think that it is reasonable to characterize them as anchored. In my view, the risks to the forecast remain to the downside for output, because the improvements in the real economy that we are seeing remain nascent and, I think, fragile.  However, I did revise my views of the risks around the inflation forecast to balancedthey are large but symmetric. This remains a very challenging period to evaluate the incoming data, and even a smaller gap doesnt mitigate the fact that the economy is still contracting in the current quarter, and most projections show limited growth for a considerable period.  Despite my forecast for higher inflation compared with the Greenbook, my overall outlook leaves the economy a fair distance from needing a tighter monetary policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the past several weeks, my key concern about the outlook has been whether the improvements in the forecast would be sustained.  Were the green shoots hardy enough to survive adverse weather?  The news Im hearing from my directors and other business contacts seems tentatively consistent with this improved forecast now being on a somewhat more solid footing.  Before the last meeting, my contacts reported that activity was still declining, but that the pace of deterioration was slowing.  Now, two months later, they characterize this as a stabilization that is in train.  I see these comments as being in broad agreement with the Greenbooks assessment of economic activity. My discussion with the U.S. CEO of ArcelorMittal is a good summary of how things are likely improving in a number of industrial segments.  The parent company is the largest steel producer in the world. Last summer, steel prices peaked at over $1,000 a ton, and inventories were relatively lean throughout the industry.  As the recession intensified, inventories climbed and prices fell. Just recently, prices were down to $380 a ton, which, Im told, just covered variable costs. Since late last year, the firm has cut production sharply and repeatedly.  Today their capacity utilization is about 40 percent, and they are running only two of their nine blast furnace facilities. During this period, steel service centers, which compete by buying steel and distributing from inventories, have been running down their stocks.  About three weeks ago, their de-stocking process seemed to end, and prices have risen modestly, by about $20 a ton.  Currently Mittal sees production, shipments, and inventories all stabilizing.  Looking to the summer, their order books for July are full, and theyre now deciding whether to fire up a third blast furnace in the middle of July for August production and delivery.  To justify this increase to 55 percent capacity, they need sustainable future orderstodays report seems helpful, 
 perhapsnot just the end of de-stocking.  Making this judgment about sustainability is difficult, in part because Mittals chief customers today are the non-bankrupt auto companies and other durable goods producers whose order flow can be chunky.  So if GM and Chrysler improve, that would further support production decisions like this. Ive heard stories similar to Mittals from other contacts.  For example, a large, diversified tool and parts manufacturer said that some of its major customers have completed their de-stocking cycles, although they have not yet relayed plans to begin rebuilding inventory levels, so its not showing up in higher production yet.  In addition, the continued restructuring process at Chrysler and GM is a positive factor for manufacturing output and particularly in our District. These reports seem consistent with our forecast of slow to modest GDP growth in the second half of 2009. Still, few businesses are reporting increasing activity, and the decision to raise production will be a close call for many firms for some time. Another important element solidifying the outlook is the improvement in credit conditions. Clearly, conditions continue to be challenging.  Many businesses report that lines of credit are being reduced and borrowing rates are being adjusted upwards.  But even businesses who say that access to credit is still a problem acknowledge that conditions are not as restrictive as they were a couple of months ago. High-quality firms have found that debt and equity markets have become quite receptive to new issuances, and the TALF appears to have been both directly and indirectly beneficial for credit markets, according to participants whom I have talked to. On the inflation front, I have been somewhat surprised that there has not been more downward momentum so far.  As the Greenbook points out, inflation expectations have not moved down as expected. I did ask my staff to investigate quantitatively what the size of a labor 
 reallocation story might be for the natural rate of unemployment.  Theres a member of my staff who has some papers on reallocation, sort of a David Lilien-style measure of dispersion and how that translates into higher NAIRUs, and she updated that unobserved components model.  The bottom line is that you can get the natural rate to move upwards of about 6 percent, but its really hard to get much more out of that.  Even if you went as far as 7 percent, which the data do not indicate, thats still quite a large resource gap. I continue to hear a great deal of concern that our expansive provision of liquidity, large-scale asset purchases, and future federal deficits pose medium- and longer-term risks on the inflation front. I know we can deal with these issues in a variety of ways, as we discussed yesterday. However, many of these programs do have exit costs that are somewhat larger than I previously thought. Our forecast continues to assume that resource slack and contained inflation expectations will result in a decline in inflation over the projection period.  I do thank Dave for his clarification this morning.  Frankly, I think he was more right than not.  I didnt realize, looking at the distribution, that theres a cherry-picking to thisif you take out just the high and just the low, the range is about  to 2 percent.  So I think thats closer to inside the 70 percent.  Were not expecting as large a decline as is in the Greenbook.  Were looking for core PCE inflation to be closer to 1 percent in 2010. Finally, from our JanuaryMarch meetings to today, there has been a marked reduction in uncertainty and downside economic risks as I see it, especially downside skews.  In March the abyss scenario weighed heavily on my list of concerns.  So I favored what I will refer to as a robust control approach to policymaking, specifically:  Try many programs in substantial size; give strong credence to their possible success in spite of their uncertain impacts; and hope that 
  some or all would provide needed accommodation. Of course, were not out of the woods yet, but the likelihood of the abyss scenario has declined notably.  In addition, Ive been surprised by the reduction in disinflationary risks. So to my mind, these are very important developments.  They lead me to put less weight on this robust control approach and move more towards the conventional weighing of the expected effectiveness and cost of these programs, and I do find myself moving back towards more balanced assessments of the necessary magnitudes for various nontraditional policies.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like the Greenbook, the Boston Fed forecast now expects that we will reach an unemployment rate of 10 percent.  Unfortunately, this statistic probably understates the degree of weakness in labor markets.  In discussion with small and medium-sized businesses in New England, it is striking how many firms have placed workers on part-time schedules and how many firms have reported reducing nominal wages to avoid further job cuts. If New Englands firms are representative of the wider economy, these 
practices may have implications for the recovery.  First, firms are likely to defer hiring not only until they are confident that the recovery has firmly taken root, but also until they have restored hours to those workers whose hours they have already reduced.  Second, wage pressures on inflation are likely to continue to be subdued, as firms in weak sectors of the economy defer wage increases until demand for their products increases. In my forecast, the recovery is quite restrained, making it unlikely that we reach full employment during the forecast horizon.  The recovery will be slower if mortgage rates do not encourage buyers back into the market.  While the 30-year mortgage rates have come down somewhat from the recent spike, they remain well above the rates earlier this spring.  Not 
  surprisingly, loan applications have slowed, and Realtors report diminished foot traffic after the rates increased.  But higher rates may slow the recovery even further.  Higher rates will likely put downward pressure on housing prices.  This, in turn, will further diminish household wealth, reducing consumption as households seek to recover from already large wealth losses.  In addition, lower house prices will likely add to the many households who struggle with the potential of home foreclosure.  As I discussed briefly yesterday, an interesting aspect of the mortgage market during this recession is that five- and seven-year ARMs are not priced as attractively as they were earlier in this decade.  If longer-term mortgage rates remain high, improved pricing of longer-term ARMs does have the potential to bring some borrowers back into the market. While financial markets have improved, they remain fragile.  The municipal bond market could still be roiled by the lack of political will by some states and municipalities to address their financial problems.  Bank lending could be affected if commercial real estate and consumer loans continue to deteriorate, forcing higher loan loss reserves, which, for many banks, are still moving slowly relative to the growth of nonperforming loans.  While the securitization market appears to have improved somewhat as a result of the TALF, it is unclear how the eventual removal of TALF financing and the possible legislation on securitization are likely to affect the recovery in this market. Overall, my forecast is not much different from the last FOMC meeting, and, frankly, that forecast implies uncomfortable outcomes for both unemployment and inflation.  Higher mortgage rates have caused me to push out the housing recovery, and the recent labor report has raised my path of unemployment.  Many banks remain capital constrained, and I expect many 
more to be constrained as they need to increase loan loss reserves.  Thus, I place a low 
  probability on rapid expansion of bank lending over the next two years.  Even by the end of 2011, I expect that the unemployment rate will be well above full employment and inflation will be well below my target.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Eighth Federal Reserve District, the decline in economic activity is slowing or stopped.  Still, there are no immediate signs of improvement during the summer or fall.  Business contacts are definitely subdued.  I might even describe them as resigned to sluggish economic performance for the foreseeable future.  In recent calls that I made, there were some reports of slower activity in the second half of May and into June, so well see if that shows up in the numbers going forward.  That worried me a little bit. On the national scene, my sense is that markets may have jumped ahead of the reality of the economy during the last 60 or 90 days.  That said, I am hoping for some improvement in the second half, but I think theres a tremendous amount of uncertainty about where the economy will be going forward.  I think were vulnerable to further shocks.  Shocks are unpredictable, so I dont know where they would come from.  But when youre down, other things can happen.  I also think that the longer that the recession drags on, the greater the likelihood that new problems can arise that would not have been problems if the economy had turned around sooner.  And I just wanted to say I remain concerned about the global nature of this recession, which I think is largely unprecedented in the postwar era.   Ive been concerned about possible deflation and a deflationary trap, that is, a steady state that we could actually get stuck in. If we were to enter such a trap in 2009 or 2010, we would have a very hard time getting out.  The first priority for me has been to avoid this outcome, and 
that means building up inflation expectations.  I think the probability that this will happen has 
 fallen some.  For instance, the five-year TIPS inflation compensation has increasedits about 125 basis points now. I know theres a lot of analysis about exactly how to look at that.  If you just take it at face value, it has improved a lot from very negative values in December and January, but its still not a lot of inflation over the next five years.  Its below our inflation target, and youd like to see it higher, I think.  Also, the Greenbook forecast has inflation declining further, so I dont think were out of the woods on the deflation threat, although the outlook has improved a lot from what it was in the December-January time frame. I think were entering a period of volatile expectations in markets.  The markets are just not sure what to think about the unprecedented policy environment.  Theyre looking at numbers that they have not seen before, and theyre not sure what to thinklarge budget deficits where the longer-term outlook is very unclear.  Given that, I think our purchase program looks like and I put that in quotes: looks likedebt monetization.  I dont think anybody involved wants to go there, but thats the appearance. And youve got legislation pending that may appear to threaten Fed independence.  I think the hard thing about our debt markets is that theyre global markets, so especially for those outside the U.S. who may not understand the subtleties of our politics, this just looks like a lot of debt issuance by the Treasury and some purchases by the central bank.  Its just very hard to get 
away from that perception, and that has made me pessimistic about further expansion of our 
large-scale asset purchases. I think current policies are pushing very hard on our credibility.  As I mentioned before, I dont think we could get away with these policies if we were a smaller developing country.  Fortunately, we do have a large stock of credibility to draw upon, but we need to be careful.  Just because everything has gone well for a long time in the U.S. doesnt mean it will continue to do 
  so this time around.  Again, the policy response to this crisis has been unprecedented, so the current situation may not produce the outcomes that we hope for. Im also concerned, along with President Plosser and others, about the emphasis in the narrative on a large output gap keeping inflation at bay into the indefinite future.  I dont think inflation is a near-term problem, but it could be a medium-term problem.  I also think there are conceptual difficulties with the traditional output gap measures.  The empirical relationships are not that great. So the moment is really ripe for a possible policy mistake along this dimension, since were coupling that with our unprecedented policy action.  I think thats going to remain an issue for the FOMC for some time to come.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Well, Mr. Chairman, in our District, clearly conditions do remain weak, but the information we are receiving suggests the contraction has lessened, and expectations for future growth have actually improved.  We are seeing some reductions in residential real estate inventories in the lower-priced housing sector, partly because house prices have adjusted and 
partly because of some credits for first-time home buyers.  Manufacturing continues to contract, 
but there are signs that the decline has moderated noticeably.  Our May manufacturing survey showed that the pace of decline in production has actually reversed and in employment and capital spending it has stabilized.  Preliminary results from our June survey further indicate that we are close to almost recovery levels in terms of District manufacturing.  Our energy sector, having fallen pretty significantly, has stabilized, but we are primarily producers of natural gas, so stabilizing is about as good as we expect for any time soon.  Commercial real estate remains a source of pretty considerable weakness. Our directors and District business contacts indicate that 
  a combination of higher vacancy rates and some difficulties in obtaining financing are really limiting that market in our region. On the national front, our outlook isnt a whole lot different from that of the Greenbook, except in one important way, and that is that we have a more aggressive policy path for interest rates. They increase almost a year sooner than some outlined in the Greenbook.  In terms of the inflation outlook, we are not seeing any pressures towards deflation and, actually, not seeing any signs at this point towards inflation either.  So I see the risks as fairly balanced as we go forward.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Broadly speaking, District economic conditions continue to track the national economy for the most part, as is typically the case.  Theres pronounced weakness in business investment (both in commercial construction and in spending on equipment and software), signs of stabilization in consumer spending, and continued deterioration in the labor market, although recent declines in employment have not been as severe as those at the national level.  There are some encouraging signs in terms of sales activity in the residential real estate market not related to foreclosures or short sales.  And we do have a reasonably healthy agricultural sector and a reasonably healthy energy sector. As far as the national outlook is concerned, my forecast is quite similar in most respects to the latest version of the Greenbook outlook.  I expect positive economic growth to resume momentarily and to be quite subdued initially for the reasons that have been previously well identifiedcontinued strained credit conditions, negative wealth effects, significant job losses, and lots of excess capacity both in the services sector and in a variety of goods-producing industries, as well. But given the pace and depth of the downturn, Ive been asking myself, 
  shouldnt we expect perhaps a more typical recovery?  I havent been able to quite talk myself into that scenario yet, but I guess I wouldnt entirely dismiss it.  In any event, I do expect momentum to build and growth to accelerate as we get further into 2010, and to accelerate further in 2011, basically because the problems that I just alluded to should be diminishing over time, and were in an environment of expansionary policies. As far as inflation is concerned, I continue to expect inflation to remain relatively low, given appropriate policy. And in this regard, I expect that the federal funds rate will have to start moving up in the latter half of next year, or early 2011 at the latest, in order to achieve that outcome.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Fifth District economic conditions are pretty well aligned with the national situation, with activity stabilizing in some areas, though at a level thats still pretty depressed. Our manufacturing index has risen above zero from deep into negative territory, and there are encouraging signs for orders, shipments, and, to a lesser extent, capital expenditures. Nevertheless, services, residential construction, and the labor market all remain depressed. I think it does appear that the real economy is reaching something of an inflection point.  Since the turn of the year, real PCE, light motor vehicle sales, and single-family home sales, starts, and permits have leveled out and, in some cases, eked out small gains.  Initial unemployment claims have steadied and have come off their early peak.  Consumer sentiment indexes have bounced back from their lows.  The ISM manufacturing survey rallied, as did many regional surveys. Encouragingly, the new orders component poked its head above 50, and, 
moreover, this mornings durable goods report seems pretty positive. 
 Equally heartening has been the improvement in financial market conditions.  Equity prices for financial institutions are up significantly from their lows in early March.  Bank CDS spreads have declined. A wide range of large banks have successfully issued equity and non-FDIC guaranteed debt. Three-month dollar LIBOR rates are below 1 percent.  Triple-B corporate bond yields are just below 8 percent, off from their 2008 year-end highs of 10 percent.  I think all of this suggests a substantial reduction in risk premiums.  And because the extent to which bank liabilities are government supported hasnt changed materially over the horizon, the improvement is probably due to a better outlook for fundamentals. At the same time, these signs of stabilization do not by any means guarantee vigorous economic growth any time soon, and I dont think they will prevent unexpected shocks, obviously. The stabilization in housing starts and auto sales is encouraging, but its occurring at extraordinarily low levels. The outlook for commercial real estate is not goodfurther increases in vacancies, delinquencies, and loan losses are in store.  And many banks face further increases in credit card losses and commercial real estate losses as well.  While, at this point, it looks as if these familiar features of cyclical downturns are going to prove manageable, they do suggest that we have a ways to go before the downturn is over and growth may be slow for a while. Since December, core PCE inflation, excluding tobacco, has come in fairly close to 1 percent. But even though energy prices helped us late last year, gasoline prices have been increasing steadily over the last few months. Weve seen a consistent pattern over the last several years of increases in energy prices followed by smaller but noticeable increases in core inflation with a lag of a couple of months. This pattern makes me skeptical of the Greenbooks forecast that core PCE inflation is going to fall significantly over the next couple of months and 
 quarters. And it leads me to expect core inflation to remain where it is, or, if anything, to rise over the next few months. Core inflation has been reasonably well behaved so far this year.  Worries about future inflation have become disappointingly common over the last few months among financial market participants and among my contactspeople raise it independently.  And a couple of Presidents have cited concerns that link that to what people see happening to our balance sheet.  I think concerns about sustained deflation have evaporated more or less, and measures of inflation expectations have increased noticeably, obviously, since our last meeting.  Theyre back to levels consistent with those we saw before the middle of last year, levels we associated with price stability. Market commentary speculated about the possibilitywe talked about this a lot yesterdaythat the Fed will come under pressure to monetize future deficits, given the currently unsustainable upward path they seem to be on. Weve been reasonably clear about our planned purchases, but we provided much less information, I think, about our reaction function. I think thats an inevitable byproduct of the urge to preserve discretion, and this is an example of the extent to which discretion can be the enemy of clarity.  That lack of clarity, I think, contributed to the beliefand maybe its not a predominant belief, but it is something you hearthat we might be setting a ceiling on long-term interest rates, kind of the way we did before the 1951 Accord, a period when monetary policy was very inflationary. In this context, the signs of stabilization in the real economy and financial markets make it unlikely that we could announce additional open market purchases without aggravating market concerns about inflation.  But, more broadly, whatever we do with the statement at this meeting, I think we should strive to add clarity. 
 About exit, I think its too soon to hint that its imminent, but at the same time I think there would be a great benefit in clarifying the extent to which we believe we know how it would work and how we could accomplish that.  And thats sort of the delicate balance to strike in the Monetary Policy Report, I think.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At our meeting in late April, we had begun to see hopeful signs of impending economic recovery, and subsequent economic and financial developments have strengthened the view that the economy is bottoming out.  Even so, the outlook over the next several years remains disturbing.  My modal forecast shows economic 
growth resuming next quarter, but I expect the recovery to be quite gradual.  The output and employment gaps are, at a minimum, quite large, so it will take a long time to regain full employment under current monetary and fiscal policy settings.  Although downside risks have diminished, I remain concerned that the recovery is still fragile. The news on housing has been good. A broad array of data shows signs of stabilization, but the recent sharp rise in mortgage rates makes me worry about the future.  Several of my 
directors and advisory council members who are connected with the housing sector stress that the improved outlook for housing remains precariously tied to mortgage rates. Recent data on consumer sentiment and spending show improvement due in part to the fiscal stimulus.  Even so, I continue to hear a flood of downbeat anecdotes on household buying patterns. My contacts tell me that demand remains weak and that firms are cutting prices to generate sales, putting profit margins under tremendous pressure.  They note that consumers are continuing to shift from higher-cost discretionary items to lower-cost necessities.  A major discount retailer reports that for the first time in his memory consumers are passing up bulk 
 purchases of food and other staples at discount prices in favor of smaller packages with higher unit prices, because they cant come up with the money to carry the associated inventory.  This suggests very tight liquidity constraints. Consumers seem particularly concerned about the tightening of credit card limits. And, of course, labor markets continue to deteriorate badly.  Its a sign of how bad things really are that near euphoria broke out with the announcement of 345,000 nonfarm jobs lost in May. The unemployment rate is soaring month by month, and, even worse, it appears to 
understate the true extent of the deterioration, given the unusually high incidence of permanent, as opposed to temporary, layoffs, and the unprecedented increase in involuntary part-time work. On the bright side, overall financial conditions have certainly improved since we last met.  That bodes well for recovery. Its encouraging that so many banks have been able to raise private capital, and in many respects market stress has subsided. The combination of falling risk spreads on bonds, higher stock prices, higher Treasury rates, and a lower dollar seems consistent with a greater appetite for risk, probably stemming from the positive tone of emerging economic data. This development should be constructive for growth overall, but, as I said, I hope that the associated rise in mortgage interest rates doesnt reverberate too strongly.  With foreclosures on the rise, and house prices still falling, higher borrowing costs could stall the emerging rebound in residential construction, further impairing financial institutions and markets and, thereby, hampering the recovery more broadly. My forecasts for output and employment are similar to the Greenbooks, so I wont go into the details.  I do want to emphasize that I anticipate a rather sluggish recovery, not the rapid V-shaped recovery we have frequently seen following deep recessions in the past.  The process of balance sheet repair that households and financial institutions are undergoing will result in 
 subdued spending for an extended period, and monetary policies here and abroad are not able to play as big a role as usual in promoting recovery because of the constraint of the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates. Given the uncertainties in the outlook, I very much appreciated the range of well-designed alternative simulations presented in the Greenbook.  I noticed that even under the typical recovery simulation, which has much stronger growth than in the baseline, the unemployment rate remains well above the 5 percent NAIRU by the end of 2011, and inflation hovers around 1 percent. This outcome reflects the large unemployment and GDP gaps estimated for the first quarter.  With a GDP gap of about 5 percent, the economy is in a deep hole, and it will take a long time to climb out, even if growth is rapid.  This is a key consideration in designing optimal policy. My forecast contains an estimate of the output gap similar to the Greenbooks, but Im well aware that the size of the gap is uncertain and sensitive to the precise methodology thats used. So for this forecast round, we assessed the level of the gap from a variety of different perspectives to see if any central tendency emerged.  The analysis that we carried out turns out to be very close to what Mike Kiley described in yesterdays briefing and what the Board heard in the briefings that you had on Monday. Obviously, great minds think alike, and I know President Evans and his staff in Chicago were doing exactly the same things that we did and the Board did.  So I wont go into all of the details.  Ill just say we reverse engineered wage and price Phillips curves to estimate the level of the GDP gap that would produce the inflation rates now being observed. We used a variety of wage and price measures to assess sensitivity.  We investigated whether a possible decline in the efficiency of the job-matching process might be raising the NAIRU by comparing cross-industry dispersion of employment growth in this cycle with earlier 
  ones. And we, too, assessed the evidence relating to the Beveridge curve and possible shifts.  I simply want to second or third the conclusions that Board staff reached and that President Evans described. It is possible to find reasonable methodologies that would lead to a short-run NAIRU higher than that used by the Board, or to output gaps that are somewhat smaller than those that are embodied in the Greenbook or in our forecast.  But no matter what methodology is used, in every case we find very substantial slack in labor and product markets. Id like to discuss briefly one thing that we did.  We looked at whether the financial crisis and the large sectoral reallocations away from housing finance and autos may have slowed underlying total factor productivity growth and thereby the pace of potential output growth.  If so, our forecast of output growth going forward could be too large.  Although measured TFP has declined over the past year or so, which is typical of past recessions, we find that, adjusted for the utilization of labor and capital, it has actually risen strongly during the recession.  The conclusion that underlying productivity growth has remained on or actually above trend is confirmed using an alternative approach of estimating permanent technology shocks from the productivity data. So, to conclude, if the recovery is as slow as the Greenbook and I expect, it will take quite a number of years to get back to potential output.  As a result, I expect core inflation to drift lower over the next few years, falling below the 2 percent rate that seems best to me. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I recently accompanied my wife to a board meeting of the American Film Institute, of which she is a director, in President Yellens District in Hollywood, and to prepare for that trip I read Evelyn Waughs wonderful novel The Loved One: An Anglo-American Tragedy. The plot line is about a minor British poet who goes to write 
 the greatest movie of all time about the life of Percy Shelley and settles for employment at a pet cemetery called The Happy Hunting Ground.  Theres a precious scene in that novel where the tough head of the film studio is surrounded by people around a table and in the back benches.  The people around the table are described as yes men and those on the back benches as nodders. I find myself nodding and saying yes[laughter]to everything that has been said by my predecessors at this table.  There is a unanimity of view, it seems to me, that, as President Yellen just pointed out, the economy is bottoming out, but it is a gradual and fragile recovery, and it will take a long time to regain employment.  I forecast an almost checkmark-shaped recovery, which is a long recovery, as President Rosengren stated, with the unemployment rate masking some of the problems we have with our workforce, and I do not foresee a very quick recovery. What concerns me is that the people that I talk to, the CEO list that I give you, and even the people we talked to in that part of the country, which is not known for being plugged into reality, also have a unanimous view. I want to touch on two aspects that were mentioned by my predecessors here. The first is with regard to President Rosengrens point that unemployment may be masking deeper problems.  Even in your District, President Rosengren, I noticed that Harvard Law School just sent out a letter recommending that their graduating class seek employment in other fieldsperhaps at pet cemeteries; Im not quite sure.  [Laughter] If you look at Skadden, Arps or Cravath, Swaine, & Moore, people that I talk to, they have deferred an entire class in terms of their hiring.  So heres the point:  I think we also need to be cognizant of the fact that the service sector is going to have a very slow recovery in the process.  This was underscored by the CEO of AT&T, who said, If it isnt life or death, were not hiring anybody 
    or investing in anything. And I think thats pretty much a unanimous view around the table of CEOs that I spoke to. Second, President Lockhart mentioned cap-ex. Cap-ex is being postponed. When you have excess slack, youre going to have less commitment to cap-ex.  But heres the point I want to mention:  Among the CEOs that I speak to, and even people that you would never expect to be criticalIll drop a name, because it was absolutely shocking, Warren Beatty, for example theres a unanimous worry that, The plethora of programs coming out of Washington is creating enormous uncertainty.  Uncertainty is the enemy of decisionmaking, the enemy of capitalism. Weve talked about this before. Its not that changes are being proposed.  Its that no one knows when they will stop, and I find that this has heightened uncertainty in the business sector and is retarding cap-ex. And that wont change until there is resolution about the enormous changes that have been proposed by the Congress, by the Administration, and so on.  Its not that the business community and others are against the proposals, its that there are so many coming so quickly that its creating enormous uncertainty.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is this the Warren Beatty who starred in Reds? [Laughter] MR. FISHER. Also Heaven Can Wait. [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, hopefully heaven cant wait too long.  [Laughter] I just want to amplify what President Fisher said about the uncertainty created by all of the Obama Administration initiatives.  We heard from one large firm that this is really important, especially in health care: Why would you build a new wing of a hospital if you dont know what the reimbursement rates are going to be? 
  Generally, I think the economy is still very weak.  I think were probably at or very close to a cyclical bottom.  The market reaction, though, is really mostly, to my mind, about pricing out the tail risk of a depression rather than pricing in a strong recovery, and I think the market over the last week or two has sort of been rethinking its reaction.  What has been going on in the labor market is pretty striking.  The rise in the participation rate may be indicative of stress in terms of balance sheets and people being forced back into the labor market, even though the prospects arent very good. Past credit crises certainly suggest that the dynamics of recovery this time will be very different. The wealth shock is unprecedented. Credit availability is going to be constrained for quite a while. There are significant rollover risks for large groups of borrowersthe commercial mortgage market is probably the most significant one.  And its going to take several years, I think, for the financial system to get back to more normal functioning. One thing that struck me in looking at the macro data is how weve been benefiting from unusually favorable income dynamics up to now.  If you look at the trend of income relative to hours worked and wages, real disposable income growth has been very, very strong6 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter and on pace by the New York Fed forecast for a 4.2 percent annual rise in the second quarter. That has allowed the saving rate to rise sharply without triggering a big fall in consumer spending.  The problem is that the factors underlying the sharp rise are all behind us: the big increase in transfer payments, automatic stabilizers, the large COLA for Social Security caused by the big run-up in energy prices last year, the tax cuts, changes in withholding rates in April, and payments made to Social Security recipients in May and June. 
      Looking forward, the trend in real disposable income is going to be much worse in the second half of the yearwere probably going to see actual declines.  So were assuming that consumption will rise despite the fact that disposable personal income is falling, and the saving rate will fall as a consequence.  But I think there is a risk to the downside, because maybe the saving rate wont fall and consumption will just be weaker than we anticipated. The other thing I am worried about is this:  I think its very premature to rule out further financial market disruptions.  A couple of times in the crisis weve thought that things were getting better, and then there was another shock.  Obviously, when Lehman failed, we had no idea what the macroeconomic consequences of that were going to be.  One thing I am worried about is that the TLGP is almost certainly going to end September 30, so that means financial institutions are going to face more rollover risk for all the debt thats coming due after September 30.  And we still have several very large, systemically important institutions that are very fragile and that have broad international operations.  We dont have a resolution mechanism to deal with them if they get into difficulties.  And the political will to help these firms if they do get into trouble, I think, is quite a bit subdued compared to what it was a year ago.  So I think thats something to be concerned about. On inflation, I think the near-term outlook is that core inflation is going to moderate from where it has been.  The tobacco taxes are sort of a funny anomalyhow you raise taxes shouldnt really affect the inflation numbers, but it does in certain cases.  Inflation expectations seem to be well anchored despite some worries about monetization of the debt, and we have a very large output gap. To make sure that we keep inflation expectations well anchored, I think we need to do more in articulating why will be able to exit smoothly.  The biggest upside risk on 
inflation to me would be a broad loss of confidence in the U.S. abroad caused by worries about 
   fiscal sustainability and the independence of the Fed.  The only way I can see getting a big inflation problem any time soon is if the dollar were to collapse.  Theres probably some risk of that, but I think it should be very low as long as we communicate clearly that we have the tools to manage our exit smoothly and that we are committed to long-term price stability, regardless of what the fiscal authorities do. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Data since the last meeting, along with what we have heard around this table, and reports from the Reserve Bank Districts, should give us much more confidence that the economy is indeed in the process of bottoming out.  And I think 
basically what were seeing is that the sources of weakness are abating.  Weve got consumption leveling out, housing demand leveling out, and eventually investment should follow that process.  Maybe were seeing a little bit of that in todays meeting.  The inventory cycle is further along, with stocks being reducednot as much today, Dave, I guess, as we might have anticipated, but theyre still being reducedand theyll come into better alignment with sales.  At that point, 
more of current sales and any increase in sales will need to be met from increases in production and ultimately increases in employment, setting in motion a positive accelerator multiplier process. Commodity prices are rising, anticipating increasing demand, and sentiment has come back from a very, very weak level.  Of course, as many have pointed out, importantly, in financial markets, we see narrowing spreads, rising equity prices, access to markets for banks raising equity, and access to bond markets for businesses.  So I think theres a lot of news that suggests that the economy is, indeed, stabilizing.  But, like many others around the table, I dont see many signs that theres a rebound in economic activity yet, nor do I see signs that the rebound, when it comes, will be other than quite moderate.  So I have strengthened my outlook a 
   little bit relative to April, but not by much, and it has still got the same basic pattern, which is very similar to the Greenbook. I think there are a couple of forces that will be holding back the recovery.  As a number of you have mentioned, one of them is in the financial sector.  Weve had encouraging news on financial conditions and financial repair over the intermeeting period.  But I think the underlying problems are severe and structural.  Further improvement is likely to be gradual.  The markets that seem to be working well are the plain vanilla markets, like corporate bonds, where risks are more easily judged. But even there, risk premiums remain quite high by historical standards.  The costs of debt and equity capital are elevated.  Securitization markets away from government support are still held back by uncertainty both about the legal regulatory frameworkand I think that uncertainty has probably been increasing in recent weeks with various proposalsand about the economy.  I think the securitization markets are particularly sensitive to economic uncertainty, because the risk characteristics of securitized debt are more complicated.  Those problems arent going to go away quickly.  More credit is going to have to flow through banks. Banks continue to face constraints on balance sheet capacitytheyre using the capital they raise to repay the government, not to expand loans.  Losses will be mounting in coming quarters on commercial real estate and consumer loans, and I think credit supply will be slow to ease and spreads of bank lending rates relative to cost of funds will remain elevated as earnings and capital are restored. Many of the innovations that enabled households to shift consumption over time, particularly to bring consumption forward when wealth rose, will be much more limited in 
availabilityhome equity lines of credit, subprime credit of all typesand markets remain 
fragile. I think the tentative positive interactions between financial conditions and economic 
   conditions that weve seen over the last few days and months can be easily disrupted by some bad news. So credit supplies will be limited and risk spreads will shrink gradually, only slowly reflecting the full effects of the low federal funds rate and our credit-easing actions. Even aside from the credit effects, I think global aggregate demand is likely to recover gradually. Like President Bullard, Im really struck by the global nature of this downturn.  I think households and businesses will remain very cautious everywhere following the unpleasant surprises of recent quarters.  President Fishers comments about uncertainty holding back both consumption and investment are well taken.  And uncertainty about the course of the economy, about the availability of jobs and business earnings, will abate slowly.  Many areas of the world are lagging our cycle. I worry especially about Europe, which faces very sharp increases in unemployment and problems in the banking sector that theyre only beginning to acknowledge and confront. Also, there are issues about where the global demand is going to come from over the medium term.  U.S. households will not be the engine of global demand, as they have been for the last fifteen years, as those households rebuild wealth.  Staff has roughly stable saving rates for the U.S.  I think theyre more likely to trend higher than lower after the recent experience.  
And even with stable but higher saving rates in the U.S., it is not clear what will fill the global 
aggregate demand gap.  The lack of domestic demand in Asiathe Chairmans global saving gluthas been holding down equilibrium real rates in recent years, and thats not going to 
change very rapidly.  Stronger demand in Asia ultimately depends on structural reforms in the 
Chinese economy especially, and especially in its financial sector.  So I dont expect any rapid reduction in the dependence on export-led growth from Asian countries.  And were reaching the 
  limits of fiscal policy to fill demand gapsdemographics and entitlement concerns everywhere are raising questions about fiscal sustainability and will constrain fiscal impetus. Its always hard to see what will spark a recovery at the bottom of a recession, and we could be pleasantly surprised this time, too.  But my best judgment is that these factors are holding down the equilibrium real interest rates to very low, perhaps negative, levels at a time when the ability of monetary policy around the world to lower rates well below equilibrium is severely limited by the zero nominal bound and by low inflation.  In these circumstances, I see a large output gap persisting and putting downward pressure on inflation.  I agree that the gap is 
unobservable and that we can make mistakes in gauging it.  There are also important points about resource-shifting, which raises the NAIRU temporarily.  But I was very impressed by Mike Kileys charts and by President Evanss and President Yellens comments.  I think weve got a sizable output gap right now by almost any measure, both in the labor market and in the 
product market.  I think a lot of indirect evidence is consistent with that sizable gap, especially in the labor market.  Most measures of labor compensation have decelerated sharply in recent months and quarters. To be sure, inflation hasnt come down as fast as expected, reflecting in part higher energy prices and special factors. The tendency for some inflation expectation measures to edge higher is troubling, and we need to pay very careful attention to that in our policymaking.  Productivity growth has been surprisingly rapid. The staff doesnt interpret the very rapid growth in productivity in the first half of this year as a pickup in the underlying trend, but rather as a change in cyclical characteristics. But surely the rapid productivity growth we seem to be 
experiencing doesnt suggest a slowdown in trend growth, and cost pressures from unit labor 
costs should remain subdued.  With the global output gap large, competition will be intense and 
     there will be little pricing power for business or labor.  So like many others, I forecast a slowing in inflation, albeit not as much as in the staff forecast. So, on balance, I see persistent output gaps and inflation falling below my 2 percent objective over the next few years.  My forecast, like that of the Greenbook, is that we dont do very well against either of our dual objectives.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought I would talk briefly about the real economy, then financial markets, and then inflation, in that order. On the real economy, in terms of near-term growth and employment prospects, like many of you, I think GDP growth looks shaky through year-end.  The arithmetic of GDP may yield a positive quarter or two, but I see very little evidence that that will be enduring, or at least something that is a strong foundation on which to build.  President Fisher was much chagrined yesterday to park his shiny new car next to what he described as my clunker, and he suggested that I take the government up on its generous $4,500 voucher.  Ive decided my answer is yes, so Ill do my part, I think, in the third quarter.  [Laughter] Unemployment is walking, if not running, away, as Presidents Rosengren and Yellen suggested. I suspect that the trend in unemployment is likely to create a political demand for consideration of a new fiscal package.  I think the debate on that will be hugely consequential, not necessarily in terms of the economy, but in terms of getting further market attention on fiscal sustainability. Downside risks to this rather weak forecast, I think, are in place, both with respect to non-U.S. growth and non-U.S. financial market improvements, to which I think President 
Dudley made good reference.  In terms of medium-term growth prospects, I also see downside 
  risks as pro-stability policies proliferate.  I think unemployment is likely to be more determinative of the shape of this recovery than the path of housing prices or other asset prices, and I share the views expressed by many that NAIRU looks as if its trending higher.  I raise that not really to quibble about the size of the output gap, but rather to suggest that the reallocation between capital and labor is likely to last longer and that the incomes in this economy in the medium term are probably less reliable, given the emerging mix of macroeconomic policies.  I compliment Dave and his staff for continued work on the labor market damage scenario, which, I think, is more real than we wish to imagine. Internationally, it strikes me that there is much more complacency about where things stand on the global economy than I would have expected.  When we talk to bank regulators and large banks elsewhere around the world, theres almost a nostalgia about the events of last fall.  And many of them have not gone through the capital-raising that our banks have.  I think we are rightly uncertain, as both Bill and Don suggested, about the risks to U.S. institutions. But I think the risks look to me at least as high, if not higher, for banks elsewhere in the world, and Im really struck by the fact that they are seeming to race back to the good old days at capital levels that look to me quite low, with expectations for GDP growth in their home countries which, I think, are likely to disappoint. Decoupling, which, I thought, we had proved over the course of the last year was a myth proliferated by Wall Street, seems to have found its way back into financial markets and to economists traveling around the world.  There is a view that, well, even if the U.S. bumbles along, China has figured out how to be a strong growth engine for Asia, and Europe is getting traction in and of itself. In my view, we have one global integrated economy, and those who 
   think that somehow these other engines of growth are sufficient to get us through this near-term weakness, I think, are likely to be disappointed. On the financial market side, the capital-raising that came out of the stress test results is nothing short of impressive.  That is $75 billion to keep us away from Sunday night meetings, so that has got to make us feel a little bit better.  The capital and corporate equity and debt markets are as open as theyve been since this crisis began.  But having said all of that, I must say Im a little troubled that markets dont seem to be discriminating.  Id be more confident if there were more differentiation between and among assets in the U.S. or between U.S. assets and non-U.S. assets. It looks to me as though the kind of market discipline, which I have described as being back and punitive, seems to have stepped back for a while.  And there are a whole lot of lemmings that seem to be chasing indexes and buying into everything.  So Im not as comfortable as I wish I were about this bounce off the bottom in asset prices everywhere around the world since the March 9 lows. As I think was described by Bill and others, what were seeing in these markets I would rationalize as an abatement of the panic, rather than a sign of robust recovery.  These asset prices strike me as not yet having found a new sustainable equilibrium, so the summer could test the value of these asset prices. I put a little emphasis on this, because it does strike me that the increase of, say, 30 percent on average in asset values from spring until now might be more consequential than all of the fiscal stimulus packages in trying to help get this economy going again. And to the extent that those wealth effects are reversed, I think thats likely to be hugely consequential. 
  We talked a little bit yesterday about Treasury markets.  I would only say that in the intermeeting period I think the move up in Treasury yields is for both benign and less benign reasonsits hard for me to differentiate exactly which carries the day. Finally, on the inflation front, as many have suggested, I think the dashboard indicates some normalization of inflation readings consistent with marking down prospects of deflation, rightly in my view.  We can see higher inflation compensation in the TIPS market and elsewhere.  Still, inflation expectations remain seemingly well anchored, even though we have now seen in markets both inflation and deflation scares that have gotten their attention and maybe gotten some of ours, too. Id just end with a sort of thought experiment, much of which we could carry on in Round 2. If we had this weak current economy and this set of projections that weve all forwarded for consideration and public disclosure, but had not had the panic and the extraordinary fear-inducing moments of the last year, where would policy be?  Would our prospects for policy be different?  Or are we keeping our policy accommodation at the extraordinary levels in part because of what weve endured?  Im not sure I know the answers to those questions, but they are things I will continue to think about.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The banks have settled down a little bit since the stress test. They report the stress tests were not all that terrible, and they were as surprised as I was at the ease of the capital raise.  Theyre looking for opportunities now to raise debt.  Theres no trust preferred available, and a couple were issuing investment units; one had a common equity and a convertible bond component, and another reported having to add warrants to debt in order to attract investors. 
   All would like to pay back the TARP, and theyre divided into those who most likely will not be able to soon and those who can. For those who will not soon, theyre not sure that theyre out of the woods, and they acknowledge that they wouldnt survive being wrong.  Those who have or will soon pay back cite worries about losing their top revenue producers, the cost of the government capital, the fact that new investors who are providing capital want them to get out, andprobably the most honest responseBecause everybody else is getting out. In terms of liquidity, they are moving down to or up to 100 percent loan-deposit ratios those with higher ratios are shedding credit and those with lower ratios are the beneficiaries of that. Deposits are still growing, but at a much slower rate, and, interestingly, in discussing their 
liquidity, they all pointed to their excess funds on deposit with the Federal Reserve.  So, again, I dont see any indication that bankers are concerned about excess reserves right now.  In fact, they think theyre creating them. In terms of profitability, margins are finally improving.  Reserves are still growing. Expenses are down except for FDIC assessments. Fee income is flat.  Mortgage income was huge in the first two quarters, but refinance activity, in particular, has slowed dramatically with the higher rates. In terms of credit management, the long process of working through residential problems continues. Construction lending has plateaued or a little bit better.  OREO properties are moving, although there are still problem areas, such as lots in Arizona and condos in Florida.  C&I is actually holding up. A few banks mention noticeable problems with small businesses and 
said that mom-and-pop stores are simply giving up.  Their classifications are growing as the financial statements come in and show the expected lower profitability, but theyre still not showing up in delinquencies. In terms of commercial real estate, its getting worse, but it still 
    seems manageable.  The bottom is not falling out.  Loans are classified, but not yet charging off. In terms of office buildings, as the leases renew, rents are being negotiated down, and one banker who had just worked through his residential construction was dismayed to find that the offices he had financed were full of real estate companies. [Laughter] In terms of retail, theres a lot of fallout among the smaller tenants, and there are problems with the anchors; the anchor tenants can renegotiate because theres a clause that gives all of the smaller tenants an out if they lose the anchor tenants. So the anchor tenants are absolutely taking advantage of the ability to negotiate down. And then finally we asked about the auto dealers, and they are, I think, pretty successful at moving the inventory, but they are left with debt on special use properties. In terms of new lending, high-quality credits are paying down, and demand is all from low-quality credits. One banker said he was willing to battle the examiners over his own weaker credits, but he was not willing to take on someone elses, so if someone is turned down at their primary bank, theyre unlike to find a home anywhere else.  There are lots of problems with appraisals. In particular, there are not enough recent comparables.  Many banks are exiting some products, some geographies, some industries, as well as credit-only relationships, although risk pricing is the best in ten years.   So Im left to wonder how we finance this recovery.  Staff recently helped me use the flow-of-funds data to look for the drop in credit so far, and we found that the drop in credit up to this point has not been nearly what you might have expected and has actually been in the middle to the upper range of past credit crunch recessions.  I believe that the support provided to the financial system kept it from dropping, but that support is now steadily being withdrawn, if not intentionally, then through stigmatization.  So I believe the credit crunch is still to come.  Many, many bank balance sheets are still supported by government capital and liquidity.  This credit 
    cycle also will leave plenty of credit impairment wreckage behind.  The bankers and their examiners are very, very risk-averse.  I think business credit is going to hold up better as profitability will probably come back with the improvement of sales as well as the fallout of competitors, but consumer credit is going to be impaired for a long while.  The number of bankruptcies, delinquencies, foreclosures, and charge-offs, the fact that the same credit score now equates to a much higher risk, and the fact that collateral values are significantly lower will all contribute to less credit available to consumers. Most importantly, there are a number of broken business models.  While I do believe that we need new business models in these times, the transition is likely to be much more painful than we currently anticipate, and I see it in two areas.  The first area is mortgage lending, where theres no visibility on what is going to happen with the GSE system, and there is yet no securitization 2.0 on the horizonso I dont see what happens in terms of housing finance.  The second area is credit cards. This may be a second, smaller wave of problems similar to the subprime mortgage crisis.  As I hear anecdotes of people who are in trouble on their mortgages, I am struck by the number of stories that include phenomenal amounts of credit card debt 
$30,000, $50,000, $100,000built up by taking on more and more cards with increasing lines, 
then reloading by refinancing a first mortgage or an equity line and starting again.  Just as the subprime market failed when refinance stopped, credit charge-offs are going to grow as the availability of larger lines, additional cards, and debt consolidation loans disappears.  This is fed by the current business model for credit cards, which was a land grant model.  The issuers would cast a wide net, trolling for new customers using teaser rates and additional lines, and then they would underwrite and price after acquisition of those customers, pricing for profitability by testing price increases on a sample of customers with similar characteristics and then increasing 
   the profit by balancing the higher interest income with lost customers and write-offs.  Line management included a discovery that the highest limit becomes the primary card, so line increases were based primarily on propensity to spend and propensity to carry balances, offset by the higher credit risk. New restrictions both in our regulations and in legislation now will require that they underwrite in advance, and Im not quite sure whether this means underwrite the ability to carry the interest or the ability to pay off in the traditional three- to five-year time frame.  I dont know what capacity to repay will do.  Combined with record charge-off levels, estimates are for a reduction of 25 to 30 percent in availability. If we have nearly $1 trillion in outstanding, this could be a reduction in credit available of $200 to $250 billion, combined with an inability to reload through equity loans or home refinance.  Indeed, the second most cited reason for home equity was to refinance credit card debt. So what does this do to the saving rate if those most likely to finance deficit spending can no longer do so?  I had written down here that I dont know yet, but fortunately, Governor Kohn, President Yellen, and the Vice Chairman have all suggested the possible impact of this reduction in credit. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Listening to the 15 of you who have preceded me this morning, I am struck by the fact that the central tendency of our economic analyses may be even narrower than that suggested in the projections that were gathered in advance of this meeting.  So although, Mr. Chairman, its your job and not mine to summarize, I think much of what Im going to say necessarily reiterates much of what has already been said. 
   First, the recent hopeful signs of stabilization cannot obscure the fact that economic conditions remain poor.  Even some of the hopeful signs themselves reveal how bad things are.  As many of you have noted, improvements in financial market conditions are still quite dependent on government-provided liquidity facilities and guarantees.  The recent rise in housing starts follows a precipitous multiyear decline, and it could yet be blunted by rising mortgage rates. Recent developments in the labor market have also been cited as cause for guarded optimism, but again, as many of you have noted, the news is not all good.  In fact, the news is not good at all, its just less bad. The decline in initial unemployment claims and the reduction in job losses over the last couple of months are surely welcome, but unemployment claims are still at very high levels, and we are still losing jobs in the economy, just at a reduced rate.  Meanwhile, the unemployment rate continues its apparently inexorable rise towards double 
digits. The rate of involuntary non-full-time employment has more than doubled in the last eighteen months, and the level of aggregate hours worked continues to decline.  Since December 2007, the ranks of unemployed Americans have swelled by seven million.  Analogous points 
could be made about industrial production, retail sales, or just about any other economic indicator. So let me end this first point by noting that, whatever the merits of the protagonists in the great debate on the correct measure of the output gap, the number is clearly large. My second point, again, I think, reflecting what many of you have already said, is that there continue to be many reasons to believe that recovery, when it does come, will be slow and 
fragile. I have now been tutored by Governor Duke to listen to the words that recur the most during a conversation, and this morning sluggish was high among them.  Although this is not a particularly controversial observation, I think its one that bears repeating as we consider our 
 policy trajectories going forward. As many of us have noted previously, background circumstances suggest an elongated recovery.  Economic downturns that begin with a financial crisis have historically been more painful and with longer recovery periods than other serious recessions.  Households, financial institutions, and other firms are all repairing their balance sheets in reaction to big reductions in asset values and large debt overhangs.  This response, while understandable and in many respects necessary, leans against the stimulus provided by increased government spending.  Some headwinds are even more apparent than at our last meeting.  Even as were heartened by market reception of the SCAP process and by the significant capital raises of many of the SCAP institutions, we must also note that, overall, bank lending is still declining. Moreover, the list of banks slated for closure grows longer each week, as does the list of problem banks that I receive once a week.  As some of you around this table have been predicting, the difficulties in commercial real estate markets are growing and may 
soon be felt with a vengeance at many regional and smaller banks.   Expectations of an uneven and gradual recovery are reinforced when one looks abroad.  As in the United States, signals from Europe are mixed, albeit on a somewhat lagged basis, but 
there are, as here, drags upon renewed growth when growth does come.  The effects of the smaller stimulus programs in Europe will dissipate more quickly than in the U.S.  Also, 
conditions within a number of European banking systems are still not well known.  The apparent reluctance of many countries to conduct and report publicly on their own stress tests has stoked concerns that weakness in real estate, Eastern Europe, and other exposures are weighing heavily upon some of these institutions. Several of you have already mentioned China. China is frequently cited as one bright spot in a world economic canvas that is otherwise dark gray, but it, too, actually presents a more 
 ambiguous case.  While the size and speed of Chinas stimulus package has produced impressive results in bringing its GDP growth above 7 percent, there is little evidence that China or for that matter other East Asian nations are adjusting their growth models toward greater emphasis on 
domestic consumption.  They seem to be using infrastructure and other stimulus spending as a kind of holding pattern, apparently expecting a significant rebound of consumption in the United States and Europe. Thus, even the Chinese recovery may have limited self-sustaining momentum.  The continued and, I fear, misplaced faith in the resurgence of the old export-led 
growth model is captured in the image of about 400 empty container ships parked in Singapore awaiting a return to the old normalcy. Like everyone, I welcome the indications of stabilization and in some areas bottoming out. Few would deny that we are significantly better situated than just a couple of months ago.  However, we should not be carried away with optimism or too hastily moved towards the exits.  In the current circumstances of a significant output gap, rising unemployment, uneven improvement in financial markets and firms, and uncertain prospects abroad, inflationary pressures are neither evident nor likely to be generated within the U.S. economy any time soon.  While I do not expect to double dip, I dont think it can be ruled out entirely either.  The economy remains unusually vulnerable to exogenous shocks or to renewed stress at one or more significant financial firms. This is the most serious economic slump since the Depression, and it is far from over.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. This is a good time for a coffee break of about 20 minutes. [Coffee break] 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, lets recommence.  I have a summary, which I will read to you. Most participants saw a slowing contraction and tentative signs of stabilization in economic activity.  Business and household confidence has improved some, and surveys show improved expectations for the future.  Inventory liquidation continues, which is a positive for growth later this year, and financial markets have continued to improve.  Despite this relatively 
good news, though, most saw the economy as still quite weak and fragile and vulnerable to new shocks. Labor markets are extremely soft, and financial markets may be ahead of themselves.  
While output should begin to grow again, the pace is likely to be quite slow and tentative.  Although downside risks have been mitigated somewhat, they still exist.  Likewise, recovery 
abroad seems likely to be uneven and gradual, with Europe still facing financial problems and 
East Asia still too reliant on exports. Consumer spending, though no longer declining, is not robust either, reflecting the weak labor market, sharp wealth reductions, and higher oil prices.  Real income growth is likely to slow for the remainder of the year.  Consumers continue to focus on necessities and appear liquidity constrained. Housing has shown a few signs of life but is vulnerable to the effects of the rising mortgage rates and continuing high rates of foreclosure.  Capital investment remains very soft, reflecting unused capacity and uncertainty about the economy and about the policy 
environment.  Across industries, weakness is widespread and includes service industries, although some areas, such as energy and agriculture, are doing better.   Labor markets remain a particular area of concern.  Despite some improvement in new and continuing UI claims, and a less bad payroll report for May, the unemployment rate and the rate of job loss remained high, with little near-term prospect for improvement.  Workweeks are shorter. Total hours of work have fallen significantly.  More layoffs are permanent, and the 
  amount of involuntary part-time work is high.  I should add that participation rates have risen also because of wealth effects. Slow wage growth is reflecting this weakness.  The NAIRU may have risen somewhat, but a significant unemployment gap still probably exists. Financial markets continue to show improvement.  The banking stress tests were perceived to be successful and resulted in capital raises and improved funding conditions.  Loan volumes are not falling especially dramatically, but in part this reflects government support, which may be withdrawn.  Reduced lending and tighter terms also reflect worsening credit quality, and banks still face substantial credit losses in coming quarters.  Other credit markets also continue to improve, including the corporate market and the ABS market.  The financing of commercial real estate remains problematic, however, and fundamentals for the sector are weakening. Improvements in financial markets support the stabilization of the broader economy but could prove fleeting if the projected strengthening in growth and profits does not materialize. Higher oil and commodity prices will raise headline inflation in the near term, while core inflation seems likely to be low.  As noted, wages continue to remain nearly flat, and productivity has been surprisingly high, so that the growth in unit labor costs is moderate.  Overall, inflation seems likely to be well controlled in the near term, and most see deflation risks as now relatively small.  Some were concerned about inflation expectations in the medium term.  As measured by TIPS breakevens and by most household and business surveys, inflation expectations seem to be stable at reasonable levels.  However, publicity about fiscal deficits and the Feds balance sheet has concerned many in the public and may be reflected in inflation risk premiums and longer-term interest rates.  Communication about the exit strategy and the Feds commitment to price stability is an important tool for managing expectations.  At the same time, 
   some suggest that it is important not to signal that the unwinding of the Feds extraordinary measures is imminent.   Thats my summary of what I heard, which I do think was a fairly consistent message around the table today. Let me just add a few thoughts, which will not be particularly novel, given all that has been said. First, I think one cant help but be at least somewhat encouraged by the developments in financial markets since our last meeting.  The Federal Reserve staff and leadership, I think, deserve some credit for the assessment of the banking system, and the results that that had.  Its very encouraging that banks can raise equity and that their funding has improvedCDS spreads have declined. I think that, although systemic risk is still around, it is much less now than it was a few months ago, and the reduced probability of a major calamity in the financial system is, in itself, I think, a positive.  Weve also seen improvements, as I mentioned, in other credit markets as well, partly because of government support, including Fed programs. Obviously, an important development in the financial markets in the intermeeting period was the increase in long-term interest rates.  Yesterday when the staff showed the changes in government rates across a number of industrial countries, I thought it was interesting that the increase in the U.K. rate was about the same as the increase in the German rate, both of which were much less than the U.S. rate.  Since the U.K. is viewed as having many of the same problems in terms of fiscal sustainability and the balance sheet that we have, the fact that those rates had risen no more than rates in Germany suggests to me that a lot of whats happening in the U.S. is the result of a stronger outlook and a reversal of the flight-to-quality flows, which in itself is, I think, encouraging. 
 So, again, I think one of the better developments of the intermeeting period is the broad-based improvement in financial markets.  Having said that, as someone already mentioned, weve been head-faked on this before. I recall October 2007 when our statement essentially declared the financial crisis to be over, and again, in the summer of 2008 when we were expecting growth and recovery, and then we got hit with calamities in September and October.  So I do think we need to be very cautious and recognize that the financial improvements are, in some sense, discounting progress that is expected in the future.  And until we see concrete evidence of that progress, we shouldnt overreact to the financial improvements. As many people have noted, the explicit evidence even for stabilization, much less for recovery, is not really at hand yet. For example, consumption growth in the second quarter is still likely to have been negative, and there are a number of drags that continue to be an issue there. In the labor markets, many have noted very severe conditions.  Although UI claims have come down a bit, theyre still at extraordinarily high levels, and we would expect to see continuing job losses for some time.  In housing, mortgage rates and foreclosures are going to be a drag on the very tentative improvement.  I think my message is that we should be encouraged by the financial improvements but note that they are very contingent.  They depend on the realization of actual improvement in the economy.  We have seen some stabilization, but the evidence of solid stabilization or the beginnings of growth is certainly not here yet, and we should not overestimate that evidence.  Its also important to keep in mind that, although were accustomed to thinking about the stages of the cycle and to think about growth rates, the amplitude of the shock was extraordinarily large.  So we are very far away by any measure, I think, from normalcy.  Even if the economy does begin to grow at a slow pace, well be very far from full employment for some time, which has 
 implications.  The longer youre away from full employment, the worse credit losses will be, the worse hysteresis will be in the labor market, the worse income effects will be on consumers, and so on. So the size of the decline also will have effects that could lead to a longer persistence as well. So, again, I think we should be somewhat cautious about declaring victory. InflationI heard both sides of this argument. I guess the standard view would be that core inflation, at least, is likely to continue to moderate.  There were a number of special factors besides the tobacco taxes.  There were some unusual aspects of the change in model year for automobiles, which probably raised inflation in the last few months.  So I would expect that to be 
relatively soft. Its consistent with very slow growth in nominal wages.  Also, theres productivity growth, which keeps unit labor costs under control. Inflation expectations are a somewhat different matter, as others have mentioned.  What has happened so farnamely, that inflation has come back up to more normal levelsI take as a success, not a problem.  Deflation risks were a concern.  Within reason, an increase in inflation expectations reduces real interest rates and reduces debt burdens and is actually positive.  Of course, as many people have noted, we dont want too much of a good thingwe dont want to 
go further. Higher inflation rates, besides being a problem for price stability, probably have negative effects on growth as well.  For example, higher nominal mortgage rates tend to raise nominal payments, which could have effects on the demand for housing.  So I agree with President Plosser and others that we do have to pay very close attention to inflation expectations and that our communication will be very important.  In that respect, I think that the careful description of our exit strategy in the Monetary Policy Report and the Humphrey-Hawkins will be important.  And all of us should continue to emphasize our ability to withdraw the stimulus 
                                                        9 The corrected materials for Mr. Carpenters briefing are appended to this transcript (appendix 9) 10 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 10).         and to maintain our focus on price stability.  Let me stop there and ask Brian to turn to the policy round. MR. MADIGAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin, let me note that Carol Low has available a corrected version of the chart from yesterday that had the date axis labeled incorrectly.9The Bluebook presented three monetary policy alternatives for your considerationalternatives A, B, and Cas well as a variant of alternative B, labeled B. On Monday, we provided revised drafts of the accompanying statements.  Those drafts, along with the Committees April statement, are included in the package labeled Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.10 A choice of alternative A, page 2, could be motivated by a view that the current settings of policy instrumentsa near zero fed funds rate for an extended period, the 
current specification of the Committees large-scale asset purchases, and the terms and conditions of the Federal Reserves credit and liquidity programsare unlikely 
to produce an outcome consistent with the dual mandate, especially given the recent backup in long rates. Your projections indicate that many of you anticipate economic weakness persisting for several years; the central tendency of your unemployment projections at the end of 2011 is 8 to 8 percent, and most of you see inflation in 2011 below rates that you consider to be consistent with price stability.  Moreover, many of you see very slow convergence beyond that, with at least five Committee 
participants anticipating that it will take the economy more than five to six years to return to a balanced growth path. Furthermore, a substantial minority consider the risks to economic growth to be skewed to the downside.   With both a modal outlook for weak growth and low inflation, and downside risks around the outlook for activity, macroeconomic considerations would seem to argue 
for providing additional monetary policy stimulus at this juncture.  However, with the federal funds rate at the zero bound, the Committee has limited policy options at its disposal. One of those options is to step up its large-scale asset purchases.  But as 
discussed yesterday, the Committees scope for increasing its large-scale asset purchases is also somewhat constrained:  The Desk judges that purchases of agency debt securities, if anything, should be cut back from the currently specified amount of 
up to $200 billion. And the Committee could encounter increasing difficulties in buying agency mortgage-backed securities without distorting interest rate spreads, particularly if the recent backup in long rates persists and reduces the volume of mortgage refinancing and gross MBS issuance.   In these circumstances, the Committee might be left with Treasury securities as the only asset readily available for increased purchase.  Alternative A specifies that the Committee would increase its purchases of Treasury securities by $450 billion.  
     With market participants, according to the Desks primary dealer survey, putting only small odds on an increase in purchases, staff estimates suggest that such an announcement might reduce longer-term interest rates by  to  percentage point.  The staff further estimates that, by the end of 2011, a reduction in long-term rates by this amount could be sufficient to lower the unemployment rate by 0.2 to 0.4 percentage point. However, in its consideration of expanded asset purchases, the Committee would need to weigh certain other factors. First, despite the staffs estimates, you might be skeptical about the effects of asset purchases. Or you may simply be quite uncertain 
about those effects and prefer to wait for further evidence.  Also, market perceptions of debt monetization and risks to inflation expectations that could accompany such an expansion are a worry. If the projections made by many of you turn out to be correct, inflation will remain quite subdued and any inflation scare should subside; but at this point, with the economic outlook improved, you may see appropriate risk management as calling for waiting before considering further action.  A related concern is that you yourselves might not be completely confident that the Federal Reserve will have the technical tools to execute an exit strategy at the appropriate time, particularly with an even larger balance sheet than is expected under the current program of asset purchases.  In addition, as noted yesterday, the Federal Reserve could also experience reduced income and diminished remittances to the Treasury or capital losses even with currently planned asset purchases, and an expansion of these purchases could amplify such losses. Alternative A incorporates another option for providing additional policy stimulus:  The Committee could be more explicit about the period of time over which it expects to hold short-term interest rates at exceptionally low levels; this might be an alternative means of putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and spurring aggregate demand that would not involve further asset purchases.  In particular, the bracketed language in paragraph 3 notes that, rather than simply reiterating the April indication that the Committee anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period, you could instead indicate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate at least through mid-2010.  This more specific formulation might help limit the extent to which markets price in an earlier start to firming than the Committee currently sees as likely.  
Such a statement would take the Committee in a direction that several other central banksthe Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and the Riksbank have already taken. Two notes provided to the Committee by the International Finance Division explored the experience of those central banks with these more 
explicitly contingent commitments.  The staff concluded that, at least on balance in these three cases, the commitments seemed to have had limited effects on market pricing, in part because they were perceived as providing little new information to the market. 
      The first and second paragraphs of the statement language for alternative A would set forth the motivation for further action at this meeting, particularly by citing the recent backup in bond yields.  The first paragraph would note that Although 
conditions in financial markets have generally improved, the Committee judges that further monetary policy stimulus is warranted to help ensure that the sharp rise in some longer-term interest rates over recent months does not undermine a recovery in overall economic activity.  And the second paragraph would indicate that the Committee still sees some risk that inflation could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term, repeating language used in its last three policy statements.  However, if you see the current stance of policy as suitably balancing the various risks facing the Committee, you instead might be inclined to issue a statement along the lines of alternative B, page 3. Under this alternative, the Committee would continue to indicate that it expects the fed funds rate to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, and it would retain the existing limits on its large-scale asset purchases. The language in the first paragraph would be somewhat more upbeat than in April, noting that the pace of economic contraction is slowing, that financial 
market conditions have improved, that sentiment has risen, and that the inventory correction is proceeding.  However, the Committee would temper that optimism by noting that economic activity is likely to remain weak for a time.  The second 
paragraph would reiterate the Committees expectation that inflation will remain 
subdued, but it would omit the sentence citing the risk that inflation could persist at suboptimally low rates. The third paragraph of the revised version of alternative B is mostly similar to the corresponding paragraph in the April statement.  However, the second sentence 
indicates that the Committee continues to anticipate exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate, thus pushing back slightly on the expectation among some market participants of an early increase in the fed funds rate target.  Toward the end of the paragraph, the statement no longer includes the indication that The Federal Reserve is facilitating the extension of credit to households and businesses and supporting the functioning of financial markets through a range of liquidity programs; repeating that point no longer seems necessary.  The statement continues to note that policymakers are monitoring the size and composition of the Federal Reserves 
balance sheet, but it adds the thought that the Federal Reserve will make adjustments 
to its credit and liquidity programs as warranted, consistent with tomorrows announcement of extensions and modifications to various liquidity programs. The final sentence, in brackets, would signal that the Committee is factoring exit issues into its current policy decisions by noting that The Committee will take careful account of the necessity of assuring that policy accommodation can ultimately 
be withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate time.    Market participants reportedly expect little change in todays FOMC statement, apart from a somewhat more optimistic assessment of the economic outlook than in 
       April. In most respects, the draft statement for alternative B is consistent with those expectations. However, analysts will take note that the sentence expressing concern about downside inflation risks has been dropped.  Moreover, even with the emphasis in the third paragraph that the Committee continues to expect the fed funds rate to remain exceptionally low, the bracketed final sentence, if included, could give the impression that the Committee is preparing to remove policy accommodation sooner 
than markets currently expect, and it is possible that this sentence in particular could prompt a noticeable backup in interest rates.  You may want to express your 
judgments about the desirability of including this point in the upcoming go-round. With the revisions to the language of alternative B since the Bluebook was published, the message of alternative B has become closer to that in the Bluebooks alternative B. And if the bracketed sentence in the revised version of alternative B were dropped, that alternative and alternative B would be substantively similar, so we have dropped alternative B as a separate option.  The version of alternative B without the bracketed sentence seems unlikely to prompt much market reaction. Should you believe that the Committee ought to prepare to reduce the degree of monetary accommodation before long, you might see selection of alternative C, page 
4, as appropriate. Of course, that view would be difficult to motivate under either the Greenbook forecast or the central tendency of your projections, but you might see the economy as likely to be more resilient than implied by these forecasts.  Even more pertinently, some of you have expressed concerns that the Systems enlarged balance sheet, its purchases of Treasury securities, and the extremely low federal funds rate might unmoor inflation expectations; the increase in inflation compensation and in 
survey measures of inflation expectations over the intermeeting period might be viewed as worrisome in this regard.  Against this backdrop, you might see a relatively near-term exit from the very accommodative policy stance as appropriate.   Under this alternative, the end of paragraph 1 would note explicitly the Committees expectation that a gradual recovery in economic activity is likely to begin later this year. The inflation paragraph would indicate a view that inflation will remain subdued but would leave out the phrase for some time.  As in the current draft of alternative B, this alternative would drop the recent reference to downside inflation risk. Importantly, in paragraph 3, the Committees expectation of the likely time frame for exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would be changed to until late this year.  This language would suggest that the Committee anticipates raising the federal funds rate beginning around year-end.  Moreover, further down in paragraph 3, the statement would now indicate that The Committee anticipates that the pace of purchases of securities will taper off gradually by the end of the year.  This sentence would convey a clear sense that the Committee does not intend to 
increase its asset purchases and, in fact, will begin to wind down its purchases of Treasury securities before long. All in all, such an announcement would be quite surprising to market participants, and in all likelihood it would prompt a considerable backup in interest rates and substantial market volatility. 
    A table that compares the three statements is included on the final page for your reference.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions for Brian? Not seeing any questions, lets start with President Plosser.   MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ive already highlighted some of my views on policy yesterday and earlier today.  Let me just sort of clarify.  My view of the outlook for the real economy is really not much different from most peoples around the tablenear-term  weakness, with modest growth returning in 2010.  In fact, my own forecast is for less growth in 2011 than the Greenbooksa slow recovery in the economy in many respects.  I dont disagree with that.   Where I disagree has more to do with the nature and the specification of the Phillips curve and how that guides both our inflation forecast and its implications for policy.  I dont believe that the empirical relationship with gaps or slack is nearly as tight and predictable and reliable as oftentimes we think it is, so my concern is that we have to be careful about that.  I would remind the Committee that, between 1991 and 1996, the staff, according to the chart they handed out yesterday, had substantial output gaps ranging from 2 to 4 percent for most of that period, and inflation hardly budgedit remained between 2 and 3 percent during that whole period. So while I dont want to rely on anecdotal information, it is true that this link between output gaps and inflation is not a very strong one.  I think we have to be cautious about relying too heavily on that. My skepticism about the measurement of those gaps and the relationships with inflation is most relevant for the deliberations we will have about when its time to reverse course and how we decide when that time is.  I think thats going to be a very difficult choice, given the uncertainty surrounding these relationships. A tightening cycle will inevitably occur, and 
  choosing the right time to do it is going to be important for our future ability to achieve price stability. I also think that, historically, this institution has been somewhat slow on the uptake many times.  If we rely too heavily on measures of slack in labor markets or unemployment rate gaps, we will inevitably find ourselves behind the curve, because we know unemployment rates take a long time to turn around, and the economy will turn around before that.  If we wait until the unemployment rate becomes an unacceptable level to reverse course, Im fairly confident that we will be well behind the curve. So my point is really about the nature of the Phillips curve, and about the reliability of those estimates, and about our ability to rely on them for policy decisions during this critical time. I believe the economy is in this sort of bumpy transition from dramatic contraction hopefully to expansion. I agree with everyone that there are substantial risks to that forecast, and we need to be conscious of those risks and those concerns.  Im very supportive, as I said yesterday, of the staffs proposals on winding down the facilities.  I am opposed to increasing our large-scale asset purchases.  I think we need to be very cautious in that effort.  We still have a ways to go, so we still could increase purchases if we chose to do so.  And I dont believe we ought to make decisions about adding to that volume very precipitously or quickly.  I would also hope that the argument is symmetric; that is, if the economy improves and evolves in the way that many of us are hoping it will over the course of the fall, then we may not necessarily have to go to the full limit on some of these programs.  I think we have to make that clear to the public as well. A major issue I see in the policy decision today has to do with languageI think its the communication effort thats going to be so difficult.  I think ultimately we are going to have to 
 find a way to extract ourselves from the current language of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Thats why I am somewhat sympathetic to the first part of paragraph 3 in alternative C, although I wouldnt be nearly as explicit about the timing in that paragraph: until late this year.  I would sort of strike that and just say, for some time.  Even if we raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points, its still exceptionally low, so Im not sure that the difference between level and changes here is important. Given my hesitancy and skepticism about tying our inflation forecast too tightly to slack measures, I actually am happier with paragraph 2 in alternative B than I was before, in the sense that both the persistence and size of the output gap become somewhat less dominant.  I would prefer C in that regard, but I think paragraph 2 is better than the version in the Bluebook that we saw, so Im happy with that. I think we have some difficult choices before us in the coming quarters, and it would be helpful if we could continue to push for our inflation targeting goals.  I hope that that is not off the table and will continue to be pursued.  But I do think that in the coming months and coming quarters we are going to have to make some very difficult economic decisions, and we could face considerable political pressure in the face of that.  We need to prepare ourselves for that and prepare the markets for it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we should continue now with the announced schedule of asset purchases. I dont think expanding our purchases makes any sense now, given the stabilization of the economy, the diminution of concerns about deflation, and the emergence of some scattered concerns about inflation.  I agree with you that weve sort of 
  normalized inflation and inflation expectations at this point, and were okay where we are.  But given that, I dont think it makes sense to provide more stimulus.   Its true that our credit programs have run off more rapidly than we expected as of the last meeting.  As I discussed yesterday, it means our balance sheet is smaller, so you might think that it provides less stimulus than you would otherwise expect.  I outlined another perspective, where some components of borrowing respond endogenously, as sort of a residual.  This perspective is based on the notion that the demand for reserves isnt perfectly elastic at current rates. That would suggest that the degree of stimulus hasnt turned out to be much different from what we expected it to have been. Im happy that the Desk didnt attempt to offset the shortfall in the balance sheet, as the discussion at our last meeting might have led them to think I would have desired. Im broadly apprehensive about the increases in reserves implied by completing the path of asset purchases were on.  As Ive indicated, I think the impact depends on the nature of the demand for bank reserves.  If what I outlined yesterday has some validity, then, at some point, all that buffer of borrowing from us goes away, and then the nature of the impact of our balance sheet expansion shifts qualitatively. Now, whether its quantitatively important or not, I dont think we know. We have all known that were sort of groping in the dark here as to what the exact analytics are of this balance sheet expansion as monetary stimulus.  But I think the kind of thing I outlined yesterday deserves some consideration, and it makes me apprehensive about following all the way through on the purchases. Now, Im not saying I have any idea about when were going to want to withdraw stimulus, or how the economy will play out.  It just strikes me as plausible that we get to a state where we need to think about exit. I dont know when that is, and I cant pretend that I do.  But I think that, when we do get there, were going to need to be cognizant of the elasticity of demand 
  for reserves. In consequence, I think we ought to give some consideration at the next few meetings to lower paths for our asset purchases.  If we get outcomes that are on the good side of what we are expecting, in the fourth quarter we could find ourselves in a situation where we want to pull back on what weve planned. I also think maybe a less gradual unwinding of the assets ought to be on the table. I applaud the staff again, by the way, for all of the good work theyve done so far on our exit strategy. But I think wed all admit we have a little more to do. Im happy with alternative B.  Im happy omitting the bracketed sentence at the end.  Im not quite sure what it means.  Im not quite sure about the extent to which we have taken account 
of ensuring that our policy accommodation can be withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate 
time.  So Im not sure how wed explain it to people.  And, besides, I think its a little too soon to convey, as I think the sentence would, that we think of exit as likely to be imminent enough to warrant our mentioning it in the statement.  At the same time, I do think its important, as I said earlier, to convey in the Monetary Policy Report, or elsewhere, that we have a grasp on this and were working hard on it. Also, Im happy omitting the statement in paragraph 2 about inflation being at low levelsI think its important to acknowledge the shift in inflation outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Lacker, I favor alternative B in both substance and wording. I think the staff captured my view with their description of alternative B, which said the slow pace of recovery is largely unavoidable in light of the nature and severity of the global financial crisis and the time required for healing and other structural adjustments.  I think alternative B also recognizes the tentative nature of improvement in the economy, so I see it as a stay the course policy.  As mentioned yesterday, the balance sheet is 
  expected to grow to approximately $2.8 trillion, so I think the playing out of programs as currently designed should represent sufficient stimulus to sustain the progress weve seen. I am sympathetic to the view that was expressed by both Presidents Plosser and Lacker that if we see better results, we should consider scaling back the LSAP programs.  At the same time, I think it would be a mistake to react too early and strongly to the signs of stabilization and better financial market conditions.  As many said yesterday and today, we have a particularly subtle communication task coming out of this meeting.  I think we need to encourage positive views that can be self-reinforcing to stabilization and ultimately to recovery.  But I also think we have to present a sober characterization of the state of and outlook for the economy, and we should be signaling that were not withdrawing stimulus and support for the economy at this time.  Its okay, I believe, to signal that were thinking and planning for an eventual exit, but not initiating an exit. Yesterday, I supportedthough I didnt speak for itthe plan presented by Brian Madigan for the expiration of the facilities, and I agree that the press release should and does emphasize the conditionality of that plan.  I think much of the communication task, as discussed yesterday afternoon, should be accomplished after todays statement, for example, in the Chairmans Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. On the statement itself, I can support it as its presented.  In the revised proposal, I favored B before it was eliminated.  I think it is continuous with the April statement and gives a stay the course message.  As I said earlier, it accurately captures the economic conditions.  I think the inflation language is a logical update to the April language, and since my forecast does not assume an increase in the policy rate this year or next, Im comfortable for the time being with the extended period language. And finally, I do not support the bracketed statement that was appended. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B, although on purely policy grounds I think that a strong case exists for further monetary stimulus.  The economy appears to be stabilizing and downside risk has declined, but it will be many years 
before the economy is close to operating at full employment.  Not surprisingly, the Bluebook optimal policy simulation shows that the stance of policy is not even close to the optimal degree 
of accommodation. As the Bluebook points out, unemployment is anticipated to run around 1 percentage points higher on the constrained path than on the unconstrained path for the next three to four years, and this translates into a cumulative loss on the order of 10 percent of GDP, or $1 trillion, and creates a very strong case for doing everything possible to stimulate the economy.  The problem is that the obvious remaining tool, large-scale Treasury purchases, may be less effective than hoped and may entail a variety of unquantifiable costs, as we have discussed. I wouldnt want to take an expansion of this program off the table if the economy were to worsen, but I wouldnt push for an expansion now. The bottom line for me is that we likely will need to maintain the current stance of policy for a very long time to get back to full employment, and my main concern is that markets will 
anticipate and we may be tempted to withdraw our accommodation too soon, thereby aborting the recovery.  Christina Romer recently wrote a pertinent essay for The Economist on The Lessons of 1937 that you may have read.  As many of you know, in that year, following two years of robust recovery, the Federal Reserve tightened policy too soon because it was worried 
about large quantities of excess reserves in the banking system.  The economy plunged back into depression, and I believe that a parallel can be found in Japans experience of the 1990s as well. 
 So I think we need to do all that we can to avoid creating the impression that we intend to raise the federal funds rate any time soon.  For this reason I definitely prefer to drop the final sentence in brackets in B concerning exit strategy.  By bringing this issue up in the policy statement, I am afraid we will reinforce the markets impression that we may begin to tighten policy sooner rather than later.  I think discussions of exit strategy would be better handled in testimony or speeches by the Chairman.  In the event that a reference is included in this statement, I have a very small wording change to propose.  Currently the statement refers to taking careful account of the necessity of ensuring that policy accommodation can ultimately be withdrawn. The phrase can ultimately be withdrawn sounds to me like were not sure we can do it or that we may refrain from easing policy in particular ways later on because of our concern about our ability to withdraw. So if it is included, I would prefer a more confident wording, namely, ensuring that policy accommodation is ultimately withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate time.  So I would essentially change can be to is. I also have a wording suggestion to make in paragraph 1 concerning the outlook, and my objective here, again, is to make the statement slightly less optimistic, slightly less able to be interpreted as saying that we are anywhere close to withdrawing stimulus, and, in my view, slightly more balanced.  I propose adding to a sentence in paragraph 1 of B to recognize that even though financial conditions have improved on balance, which is a net positive for the 
outlook, the increase in mortgage rates we have seen has the potential to impede recovery in the housing market.  In particular, I would propose the following language:  Conditions in financial markets have generally improved in recent months, although the sharp rise in mortgage rates has the potential to impede recovery in the housing market.  Indicators of consumer and business sentiment and so on. 
 I think the increase in mortgage rates has been substantial.  It is one of the most important and most discussed developments since our last meeting, and it does create a risk to the outlook.  I think it deserves mention in the statement as a negative factor that partially offsets what is a net improvement.  I also would argue for including it for the sake of balance.  I think it parallels our discussion in the very next sentence that says that there are some factors restraining household spending, and again, in the inflation section where we mention increases in the prices of energy and commodities as an offset to our view that inflation will remain generally subdued.  So thats a concrete suggestion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I took some comfort from our discussion yesterday on reserve management tools, although we had discussions about these before.  It does seem as if these tools are likely to be enough to allow tightening when we need it. Previously I would have thought that we would have to grapple with the problem of getting our balance sheet in better shape and that markets would see that coming well before we ever got to a positive federal funds rate.  So I guess Im more persuadedalthough the continued staff analysis will be helpful on thisthat its likely to be more contemporaneous; that is, when we decide that we need to tighten, we can bring these tools to bear quickly and may not have to signal very much in advance. I think thats very helpful, because part of what were grappling with right now is how to position ourselves for doing the tightening a few meetings or several meetings into the future.  I dont have a firm opinion really on when its likely to be the case that well need to tighten. I think its pretty far in the future, 2010 maybe.   On the large-scale asset purchases, I guess I prefer leaving them the way they are, given the improvement in the economy.  If at the next meeting we think its going to be important to 
 communicate about a tapering-off strategyif we are worried about the cliffI think we probably need to decide now about how to communicate that.  If we wait, then the cliff is going to be that much closer, and youre not really going to be able to do this with the existing size. So if you want to maintain the existing size, I think you would need to do that soon, like today probably. But its not in the statement. On the inflation forecast, it does seem to me that theres a pretty wide dispersion of forecasts for core PCE in 2011, which is not that far awayso the dispersion is a bit unusual.  If 
you take out the high and the low, then its  to 2 percent.  I hope that the minutes will reflect this diversity of opinion in a slightly robust fashion, because that debate is taking place out in the public. We all go out and face very difficult questions, and even though we might feel pretty confident about our outlook for inflation, this dispersion of views is sort of a reality check as to 
how we deal with that. On inflation forecasts, it does seem like there is substantial resource slack now. It has been a very deep contraction, and so my own forecast is relatively low.  Even if you allow for differences of NAIRUs, its a big amount of slack. But there are risks, and we know the theory says that inflation expectations can take off. That would be a key element in inflation determination and our forecast.  Events somewhat beyond our controlfiscal pressures and how they are dealt with in the large number of programs that are coming down the pike, as President Fisher reminded usand our balance sheet size are adding to this risk. I think what weve been doing is appropriate, but it does add to 
the risk. So I think a lot of it comes down to how much confidence we have in a particular forecast, and some people are inclined to write a larger number for 2011, and others are inclined to write down a much smaller number.  I kind of prefer to take the middle course, but in this particular bimodal situation, these opposing forces are difficult.  So normally in a situation like 
  this, we can fall back on timing:  We dont have to do this today, and in the worst case, were several meetings before the pressure erupts, and, Mr. Chairman, you will be providing testimony soon in your Monetary Policy Report, and that would be a natural way to communicate that.  But it does seem as though these issues have been out there, youve been out front in talking about them.  So I just dont know exactly what the likely impact is going to be from delivering that message again. So even though the bimodal beliefs are quite different, I prefer the middle course, and so I do prefer alternative B. On the particular issues for the statement, Im not bothered by the bracketed statement at the end.  I guess if I were going to make the best case, it is that it seems accurate that we will continue to take careful account of this.  Weve got the reserve management tools.  Weve just had a meeting where we talked an awful lot about it.  So its not inappropriate to raise this now. The Chairman and others have talked about exactly this issue, and probably have used words very similar to this.  We say it in public.  So what does it mean if we dont say it here in the statement but we say it in public?  Well, we can always ask that question because thats not an uncommon type of omission.  It does seem as if the language in the second paragraph gets at this middle ground for inflation, because we took out the part saying something like inflation could be uncomfortably low, or whatever the language was indicating that it could be suboptimal.  So Im comfortable with alternative B. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The forecast has high unemployment rates and low inflation rates through 2011, and the Greenbook forecast expects an undesirably low inflation rate even at the end of 2013. Missing both elements of the dual mandate through 2011 and possibly beyond strongly suggests to me that we should attempt to provide more 
  stimulus both to avoid a multiyear elevated unemployment rate and to avoid a prolonged period of lower than desired inflation. Mortgage and Treasury rates have risen despite our large-scale asset purchase program.  The increase in Treasury rates likely reflects the reduced precautionary demand for that asset as financial markets have improved.  However, the increase in mortgage rates is likely to slow both residential investment and consumption relative to what they would be if we were pushing rates lower. There has been a reluctance to intervene more aggressively in the thirty-year mortgage market because it is felt that this would disrupt market functioning.  But if our LSAPs cannot produce mortgage rates that are low enough to spur refinancing and new construction, then we have dramatically expanded our balance sheet with little to show for it. I believe we can and should do more.  While I support alternative B, I would encourage the Desk to further reduce mortgage rates relative to Treasury rates.  Furthermore, since the market for five- and seven-year ARMs is already quite limited, aggressive activity in ARMs would restore the market and provide a low-cost alternative for some homebuyers willing to float after five or seven years.  Because of the lack of activity, setting a low rate in this market and 
increasing volume would not disrupt market functioning.  In fact, it would resuscitate the market.  These ARMs also have some appeal for our balance sheet since they mature relatively quickly, making the exit strategy easier for these assets.  Acting more aggressively to restore the ARM market and to further reduce the spread relative to Treasuries for longer-maturity mortgages 
seem like appropriate steps to gain greater confidence that we will achieve both elements of our 
dual mandate within a reasonable time horizon. I would emphasize that the experience of the past seven years has taught us that conducting monetary policy in a very low-inflation environment is not as straightforward as we 
 might have wished.  At some point, we should have a fuller discussion of our inflation goal in light of the probability of reaching the zero lower bound in the future and the difficulty in conducting monetary policy when we are at the zero bound. In terms of whats in the statement, I actually would not be for having the final sentence.  We have not been communicating the path of the LSAP program.  I think we can taper as appropriate without necessarily having to discuss how were going to taper it.  I do prefer President Yellens languageI do think its appropriate to mention the rise in rates, because it has been quite appreciable, and it has been probably the biggest news that weve had in the last month in terms of what has been going on in the financial markets.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I dont know if were at a turning point in economic activity, although I dont think were far away.  But one thing I do know is that when youre close to or at turning points, theres always a tremendous amount of uncertainty:  Its very difficult to read the state of the economy; its very difficult to come to a conclusion with confidence as to how the economy is going to perform going forward in this kind of environment. The reason I mention that is that I think decisionmaking isnt going to get any easier any time soon.  I think this is going to characterize things probably for the next year and perhaps more. In this environment with all of this uncertainty, one nice rule of thumb might be to do no harm, especially since recent trends, while certainly not great, are better than they had been and in some ways better than we had anticipated just a few months ago.  So I wouldnt change any policy parameters at this point with regard to purchases of longer-term assets or other parameters that we might think about.  Yesterday I commented that I didnt think we had a problem 
     convincing market participants that we were prepared to do what it would take to restore financial stability and ultimately economic health.  I think people believe that and understand that. Im a little less convinced that they understand that we do have an exit strategy and will execute it appropriately. Against that background, and to begin to address that concern, I can favor either President Plossers alternative Cthe one he described in the material he distributed late last weekor alternative B as presented here with that last sentence in brackets included.  (Its okay with me if its modified along the lines that President Yellen suggested.)  I dont think that sentence will be read as if were about to change policy any time soon.  As President Evans commented, people have been talking about that publicly.  I think that would provide reassurance to people in the marketplace and people in the economy more generally that we are aware of the challenge and were prepared to address it:  We know were in an environment where our balance sheet has expanded tremendously and is likely to expand further, given our plans, and where theres a very expansionary fiscal policy in place with no end in sight.  I think it would be 
appropriate to make that point clear.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I noted at the end of my remarks, I dont think the central tendency that weve submitted is really a satisfactory outcome for the economy.  Were looking at an unemployment ratejust considering the center of the central tendencyof about 8 percent in two and a half years and an inflation rate of 1 percent, which is below the 2 percent that most of us have favored; and thats probably headed lower unless the economy picks up steam very, very fast after that.  I think thats why most Taylor rules and the optimal control simulations that President Yellen mentioned call for negative nominal interest rates now. 
    Moreover, I think from a risk-management perspective, which we used to talk about around here, even though the risks are more balanced on either side of this sluggish recovery now than they were, I think the cost of a shortfall is greater than the cost of an overshoot.  We know how to counter inflation. Weve done it before and we can do it again.  But this central tendency tells me that, given the size of the shock, were having trouble getting satisfactory outcomes for output and inflation.  I think the risk, as President Bullard pointed out, is that we could be caught in a high-output-gap, low-inflation or even deflationary environment.  I dont think thats going to happen, but I think theres a risk there, and if we get caught in that, I think its very, very difficult to figure out how to get out of it.  This seemed to be much easier, Mr. Chairman, when we were lecturing Japan than when were doing it ourselves.  [Laughter] Everybody had a solution for them, and somehow when youre there, there are a lot of complications, arent there? So of the two possible policy errorsmoving toward tightening too soon and moving too lateIm more worried that well move too soon than that well move too late.  I think we can correct that latter one. I dont think there is anything we can do about this now, despite the lack of satisfactory outcome.  Because of inflation sensitivity, because of exit worries, because of concerns about monetization of the debt in the presence of a large and uncertain fiscal path, Im not advocating more policy action today.  I think we should continue with our purchases.  I would go up to the limits that weve set, and I would include the ARMsat least a small amount of the ARMsin those purchases, hoping to have a positive effect on mortgage markets.  I hope our next decision is how and when to remove accommodation, to remove the quantitative and interest rate accommodation, but I dont rule out the possibility that we could take future easing actions if circumstances called for itthat would be more large-scale asset purchases, possibly, 
 and, to my mind, lowering the interest rate on excess reserves would help as well.  So I would be careful not to say something that rules out the possibility of doing something more later.  In response to President Stern, Id be concerned that putting that sentence in here would cast doubt on whether were willing to use all of the tools available under the circumstances. I think that its far too soon to signal that the exit is drawing closer; furthermore, if were seen as worried about the exit and looking carefully at it, it will undermine our effect.  I agree with everyone elsewe need to be very, very clear that we will be able to exit when we decide to exit. But I dont think were anywhere close to making that decision.  So I support the language of alternative B without the bracketed sentence.  I do think removing this sentence about inflation being less than desirable from the second paragraph will be seen as a little bit more hawkish, a little bit more worried about inflation than we were before.  I think we could justify keeping the sentence based on the forecasts that we have from the Committee, but the forecasts have been revised up and certainly the degree to which the Committee expects inflation to be less than it ideally should be has been reduced to some extent. I think its especially important to keep in the sentence about continuing to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for a time.  I think we need to signal to the market that, even if theyve changed their expectations for future interest rates, we have not, at least not appreciably.  And finally, on President Yellens point, I guess Id be concerned that putting in her whole sentence would really undermine the sense that financial conditions had improved and that the economy was in the process of bottoming out.  If we did anything, I would just add something like, Although mortgage interest rates have risen, conditions in financial markets have improved on balance in recent months.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think alternative B is sensible at this juncture. In this situation, Im going to argue here that its a good time to take stock and get more informationwed like to see how this recovery develops over the summer.  Also, I think were able to retain alternatives for future meetings, and I agree with Governor Kohn that we may want to move at future meetings.  So Ill talk about several aspects of alternative B. On the bracketed last sentence concerning the exit strategy, I agree with some of the comments that have been made that this may be more confusing than helpful with respect to the LSAP program.  We will discuss exit, and, as President Yellen said, its better discussed in testimony.  This is an inherently technical, complicated thingit just will not come across in a simple way to the general public.  It takes a lot of explaining, and I think it will be hard to figure out from this sentence what is meant in terms of exit strategy.  I also prefer the as warranted language. I want to talk for just a minute about forward guidance and naming specific dates for when we might make future interest rate moves, as are contemplated in alternatives A and C.  First of all, I think everyone has said that we need the conditionalityyou need to know how the economy is evolving in order to know when youre going to make a move.  Naming a specific date seems to undermine that, and in fact, I think it might go the wrong direction.  You might essentially be pre-announcing a rate increase far ahead of when you actually have the information to decide whether you want to do that or not.  Of course, you could always move later and get the market to move off that, but youre kind of drawing this line in the sand, and Im not sure thats what the Committee wants to do.  I know other countries have done this. One 
    thing I will say about that is, when you do that, you do get announcement effects, but thats because you surprised the markets.  Thats not necessarily good policy or a good thing to do. This business of promising to keep rates lower for longer works well in models, but youre pushing very hard on this rational expectations assumption inside the modelseverybody has great foresight about the future, everybody understands, theres a lot of credibilityand Im not sure that that maps into the reality of our situation.  Also, when you say lower for longer, you mean relative to what would otherwise be the optimal policy rule, and Im not sure that we actually have that embedded out there in the market.  I think the effects that we might get from further strengthening our commitment to low rates further out in the future are probably lost in the reality of the situation that we face.  I also think there are limits, just because of discounting in the futureif you promise to keep rates low far into the future, then that gets discounted by the markets the farther you go into the future. In summary, I would just keep the for an extended period language at this meeting and at future meetings.  I think that taps into the amount that we can get out of that future commitment, and its doing as much as we can on that dimension. Let me just make a few brief comments here about expanding the LSAP.  Ive characterized this as increasing the persistent components of the balance sheet, so I would ignore the components that are running off, such as the TAF.  They are going up at a rapid rate. As I said earlier, you know, there are concerns about monetizing the debt, and I wont go into those againI think thats an appearance issue, not an intention on anybodys part.  Those perceptions are very hard to control outside the U.S. I guess what I think about LSAP is that we are only about halfway through the current program.  We dont really need to commit to further purchases at this time, but we have the optionality to do that later.  I may be sympathetic with that later on.  
 So right now I think its better to wait and gather information over the summer.  On cliff effects, Im convinced now that we can just let the program expire as scheduled, and it wont have a major market disruption.  Again, we have conditionality to do more if we want or if it seems necessary. Let me just regale you with policy rules for large-scale asset purchases.  President Lacker said earlier that discretion is the enemy of clarity, which I thought was Shakespearesque of him. But weve not been clear about our reaction function with respect to these programs, and that makes it hard not just for the public, but also for ourselves.  You make a one-time announcement and the market is wondering, well, will they make another announcement in six months and another announcement six months after that?  Its very hard to know. I think its the Committees jobI should add, not the Desks jobto get a reaction function so that, if unemployment or output gaps deteriorated in a certain way, that would be the case when we would do more. Or the Committee could set some kind of mapping for how much we would want to do in various situations.  I actually think that would help us and allow us to do more if necessary, because youd be conveying this understanding of a state-contingent path out there in the future, which is the object that we dont have right now. Finally, this is a lost cause, but I would advocate moving the federal funds rate later in the statement.  I think it reduces emphasis on the federal funds rate as the key tool of policy.  Were seeing now thateverybodys wondering, Oh, maybe youll raise rates later this year or next year or something like that.  It may be that, the way things are evolving, the fed funds rate will turn out not to be our primary policy tool on the other side of this.  So I think we should 
think more about de-emphasizing the federal funds rate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard, we already moved it from the top of the statement all the way down to paragraph 3.  [Laughter]  I thought that was a fair compromise, by the way. President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook assumes that our policy accommodation is going to continue for some time, and yet the recovery is still quite prolonged.  As has been noted, financial market conditions have improved somewhat during the intermeeting period, but those improvements have taken place alongside of continuing significant public policy interventions.  So a little progress has been made, but I think the economy needs a considerable amount of time to cement that progress.  In this environment, I think we have room to continue to evaluate the outlook and the effects of our current programs.  So I support alternative B. Given Brians comments about the uncertainty on how the language in the bracketed sentence would be received, I would just leave it out.  Given that we are going to have a Monetary Policy Report and that you are going to give testimony in the near future, I would just rely on those vehicles to address some of these issues more fully.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im fine with alternative B, and I would at some pointnot today, but in the futurehave a preference for C.  I could work with the 
language thats in the brackets, but its not essential to me. Obviously, the economy remains weak.  But, as the discussion and as the projections have indicated, its also true that economic and financial conditions have improved.  We expect to see some modest improvement in economic growth, perhaps in the latter part of this year and 
even next year, as weve discussed. Were now in a situation where the data are changing, and 
    we are beginning to talk about the possibility of a turning point, and in that regard, I agree with President Sternthe data are mixed, and they will be mixed for some time. Looking toward the decisions ahead of us, I think that, given the mixed data and given the experiences that we had in the fall of 2007 and in the summer of 2008, there will be an enormous power of inertia at this table not to make that downward mistake.  Its hard to perceive that the monetary and fiscal stimulus thats in place, as significant it is, will really carry the day forward.  Were going to resist that until we actually see the data.  Furthermore, this period of 
low inflation is going to kind of reinforce our view that we should wait and we should make sure that the recovery is strong.  I think thats where we do risk the other side of this, and thats how we create inflationary issues or bubbles four or five years down the road because of this extended period of accommodation, and we shouldnt lose sight of that.  I think its extremely important. With that in mind, I was pleased that we had the conversation yesterday about our exit strategy. My goals around that are that we find ourselves in a position where we can talk about our policy rate being moved back towards neutral and we can talk about the fact that were shrinking our balance sheet and the degree of excess reserves.  I agree that we dont want to repeat the experience of the late 1930s, but that was a very blunt movement up in reserve requirements.  Hopefully weve learned that lesson and would be much more sensitive and much more gradual. Given the degree of stimulus, I think it will take us years to even get back close to neutral. So the economy is going to be growing slowly, but our moves back toward neutral also will be very slow. Another goal, besides shrinking our balance sheet, should be restoring the composition of our balance sheet. We are now in the credit allocation business towards the housing market, and that, of course, gives me some pause. 
 I do think that a case can be made for scaling back our asset purchase program, doing less than is currently authorized. When we originally began these purchases some months ago, the outlook was considerably weaker. Deflation was a possibility, although a small one, and financial stress was, in fact, elevated. With the improving economic and financial conditions, with the very significant fiscal stimulus beginning to kick in, and with deflation even less of a threat, I think it would be prudent to reevaluate these purchases and determine whether we need to go up to the total amount.  That is what I mentioned yesterday about carefully reviewing that at each meeting.  I also would be very reluctant to expand the Treasury purchase program.  Given the size of the debt that is being issued, the optics on that can be nothing but harmful going forward. So we have lots to think about in the long term, and I want to begin to raise the need for that long-term perspective today, even though some decisions along those lines are still in the future. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, Im in favor of alternative B.  I appreciate some of the restructuring that was made from the previous draft.  I agree with President Yellen that we ought to change the wording in that last bracketed sentence, because Im in favor of including that sentence, and heres why. I think the market is asking us to at least clarify that we have thought about an exit strategy. With all due respect to Brian, whose work I admire enormouslyboth Brians, by the wayI think we might actually get a negative market reaction unless we clarify, at least in the very general terms in which this has been described.  The Committee will continue to take careful account of the necessity of ensuring that policy accommodation, as Janet said, is (or will be) ultimately withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate time.  It 
  doesnt say too much.  I think it tees up your congressional testimony. I agree in this sense with President Evans and President Stern; I certainly am not opposed to including it, and, in fact, I think we should include it. If we did, and I would urge us to consider it, then I dont think we need to say continues to anticipate.  Thats a little bit too conditional.  Mr. Vice Chairman, I get your pointwe are continuing to, but the fact is we do anticipate.  Plus, we use the word continue twice in one paragraph.  So I would urge you to consider, Mr. Chairman, including that last sentence. It is a truism.  It is, indeed, a fact that we are taking account of the necessity of ensuring that policy accommodation is or will be ultimately withdrawn smoothly and at an appropriate time.  I dont see what it costs us, and I do think there is a general explicit and implicit expectation that we do so. One other comment:  I havent thought this through tremendously, but I dont necessarily disagree with President Rosengrens suggestion, because I think the Desk ought to have some leeway with regard to the mortgage-backed securities.  As everybody in this room knows, I thought the Treasury purchase program was a mistake.  It was a very expensive mistake.  I dont think it has helped. I think has actually set us back a little bit, and obviously I wouldnt be in favor of extending it any further.  But now that were there, we might continue the program until its done. But I think the Desk might have some discretion, and we might so instruct the Desk not in this statementbut they might work their way around the yield curve a bit for mortgage-backed securities and into certain types of mortgage-backed securities.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 
MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have three points.  First, I think it is likely well need to remove our policy accommodation sooner than the Greenbook indicates, but I think 
 its unlikely well begin to remove it as quickly as markets currently suggest.  Second, given the commitments that we have made, notwithstanding the up to language, on the asset purchases, while Im not in favor of extending that obligation, I do think we should work to achieve that existing commitment, for credibility purposes.  Third, I support alternative B and will just make a few comments on language. With respect to the last sentence, I think it is essential that markets understand that we are taking these exit considerations seriously. I think that is good both for actions that we could take that are even more aggressivethat they know were taking it with full understanding and confidence that we can exitand for actions that we have already undertaken. Having said that, I dont think this is the right place to be making that argument.  I dont think our experience in the last few years in using this statement for nuance or for volume 
control has proven to be the most effective way of doing so.  I think we have ample opportunities through you, Mr. Chairman, to be very clear about the need for exit and these considerations.  So, on balance, though Im sympathetic to the truth of it, I think it would be more prudent for you to make this point clear and consistent in your Monetary Policy Report and other speaking opportunities. If the bracketed sentence were in, wed be proving a little too much.  To me, the fact that were now entering this into the statement does have the feel of sort of protesting.  So on balance, I would favor not doing it, though I am, of course, comfortable with the substance. I just want to flag the penultimate sentence.  The Federal Reserve is monitoring the size and composition of its balance sheet.  I like it, and I think it helps for the announcement that we make on Thursday, about Brian Madigans recommendations, which is pretty important.  I think its nice that we have a bridge to that, so that market participants and reporters alike dont think 
  that we have, in their view, yet again surprised them on what the substance is.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im going to be quite repetitive, so Ill be very brief. I, too, am troubled by the projections not being consistent with our dual mandate.  However, with Treasuries as the only option for expansion, Im not at all convinced that a modest increase in our Treasury purchases brings us that much closer to our objective.  And I am 
concerned about the difficulties with exiting an even larger balance sheet.  So I support alternative B, and I would omit the final sentence in light of the risk that the interpretation would be that our exit is imminent.  Finally, I would echo President Rosengrens and Governor Kohns support of option ARMs. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I must confess to being somewhat discomfited by what I see as a disconnect between the analyses of the economy, which I alluded 
to in the earlier go-round, and the fact that when it comes to policy there seems to be more concern about the potential for inflation some years out than there is with the serious underperformance of the economy today and for the foreseeable future. I understood our action in March to be an effort to provide further accommodation in the circumstance of zero-bound rates.  I think its very difficult to make a judgment now as to exactly what effect that has had.  It does seem, as President Yellen mentioned earlier, that there 
is a strong theoretical case, that the counterfactual is difficult to come by, and that it is, other than statements of future intentions, really the only policy tool available to us. 
 I was somewhat attracted by not an option in the Bluebook, but an option included in the June 16 memo from the two Brians, which was to modestly stretch out the Treasury purchase program until the end of the year.  I was attracted to that for a variety of reasons.  One is that it just created a certain time symmetry in our decisionmaking, because the MBS and agency debt programs go through the end of the year.  That, in turn, avoided what I fear is now going to be an enormous spotlight placed upon us at the August meeting, which is going to be interpreted as the moment of truth in deciding what happens now with the large-scale asset purchase programs.  I 
also thought that it might offset, to some degree, what I continue to fear is going to be the interpretation of market actors and economic observers more generallynot simply that we failed to expand today, but, within the context of the announcement to come tomorrow, the announcement likely to come from the FDIC, and, precisely as President Fisher has noted, 
because there seems to be a demand that we talk about scaling back the program, that this inaction will be seen as a beginning response to those demands, which, for obvious reasons, I think is misplaced as a policy matter.  Having said all of that, I note that there is little or no appetite in the rest of the Open Market Committee for even this action and certainly not for what was included in the Bluebook as alternative A, which I actually wouldnt favor at this point either. So I would be prepared to go along with alternative B.   Let me now turn to the language issues in alternative B, which, as you can imagine, also reflect some of my concerns.  Like some of the earlier speakers, I find that the first paragraph is a bit too upbeat, not just for the way that I read the economy, but, again, for the conversation we 
had around this table earlier this morning.  Its not that theres anything in there thats wrong or that I disagree with. Its not what is saidI guess its more what was left unsaid.  I was trying to figure that out overnight following dinner at the embassy and the baseball game later on in the 
 evening. It lacks a reference to what so many of us commented on, which is our expectation of just how slow the recovery will be when it comes.  You see gradual resumption of sustainable growth in there, but the likelihood of a long period, and a rather halting one at that, is what came through in much of what all seventeen of us said earlier in the day.  I would welcome any suggestions from anybody else as to how we might add that idea.   The more important issue to me is the potential inclusion of the final bracketed sentence, which I think would be a significant policy mistake. And I think that for several reasons. One is 
my substantive policy views, which I described earlier.  But, probably more importantly for the rest of you, I think it would be a mistake precisely because of the way these statements are read, so Im elaborating a bit on what Governor Warsh has said.  As everybody knows, anything 
regarded as new in these statements is invested with enormous significance.  By and large, the statement goes a little bit by incrementa word is dropped here, a phrase is added there, and people kind of masticate those changes.  If youve got something that is brand new, something that appears to be satisfying a demand from a certain group of market actors, I think that will be invested with enormous significance.  Under the circumstances, I dont see that the policy position of the Open Market Committee is there, and I, for one, dont think that were going to actually get there anytime soon.  I also agree with President Lacker in that I have difficulty understanding what that sentence actually means. Its either a tautology, in which case its not particularly helpful, or its suggesting something that I dont think weve actually done in a policy sense. So I think its both appropriate and important for the Chairman and others, either in public testimony or on background, to explicate the various considerations that were reflected in the very useful memos distributed by the staff.  But I do think that this would be the story of this Open Market Committee meeting if it were included.  Thank you. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker, you had a comment? MR. LACKER. Governor Tarullo, you mentioned an imminent announcement by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation? MR. TARULLO. I think theyre likely to ramp back the guarantees that theyve been providing. MR. LACKER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The statement is one way we communicate, but we also communicate in speeches.  I just want to reemphasize one more time that its really important in our communications to distinguish between stressing how well prepared we are to exit, in the sense of having the necessary tools, and actually exiting. I think we have to be really clear on that, or else we are going to confuse people into thinking were about to exit because were talking about our ability to exit.  We obviously need to demonstrate that we have the ability to exit to keep inflation expectations well anchored.  But we dont want them to think that were going to exit soon, or sooner than we actually think, because that will boost the expected path of short-term rates, which will raise long-term interest rates, and, therefore, choke off recovery.  So its tricky. If you think of long-term rates as having three major componentsthe expected path of real short-term rates, inflation expectations, and risk premiumsyou can sort of put it in that context. Making it clear that the economy is pretty weak and that we dont think theres any meaningful inflation risk, so we can keep short-term rates low for an extended period, should put the focus on that first component, keeping the real rate path expectations well contained.  Making clear that we have the tools to exit smoothly, so we can keep inflation in check over the 
     longer term, should work on that second component by keeping inflation expectations well anchored. It also should work on the third component, because if we keep inflation expectations well anchored, there will be less dispersion in terms of inflation expectations, and that presumably will result in a lower risk premium. Thats sort of how I think about it conceptually in terms of the task at hand.  Its not easy, but I think we have to be very, very careful in how we go forward communicating. In terms of the LSAP program, I think the tapering is not as big an issue for Treasuries, because the amount of Treasuries that were purchased is not that large relative to the flow of issuance. I think we can do it without actually saying it explicitly.  We can just purchase Treasuries at a little faster rate than the $300 billion rate over six months, and so at the end we wont have quite as much left, so it will just taper off.  The other problem with talking about tapering is that it implies that youre done.  If we start talking about tapering, people say, Oh, theyre done. I think its premature at this stage to make strong statements about what we want to do or not do with the purchase programs going forward, especially if the environment turns out to be worse than we expect. On the first paragraph, I agree with Governor Tarullo.  The first paragraph does sound sort of upbeat. Im not really sure how you would fix itmaybe you could try to have some language that suggests that none of this is a real surprise.  In other words, the economy is evolving pretty closely to the forecast that we actually had, so the improvement is not a shock to us. Its just that there are lots of other issues still outstanding that make us worry about the strength of the recovery over the longer term.  So its a little bit upbeat relative to what I think we really think around the table. 
   In terms of the statement, Im in favor of B.  On the last, bracketed sentence, my question is really:  does it reassure, or does it make the market more worried about our ability to exit and about the timing of exit?  Im really not sure.  I think you could argue it both ways, as people around the table have done. My view is, if were not sure, we probably shouldnt include it, because I go back to what Governor Warsh said:  This is not the greatest medium of communication. I think I would exclude the last sentence, just because Im not sure how the market will react to it.  Its probably better to take that up in the Chairmans testimony or in the Monetary Policy Report or in speeches.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, everybody. I think that most of us are agreed that, given the improvement in the economy, theres not much need to change our policy stance today, so we should keep our programs in place on the schedule that we have already announced. That would bring us to alternative B, which I think is the right choice.  Most of you were in favor of striking the last sentence. I think thats the right decision.  Im reminded of an experience I had when I first took this job, when we were still raising interest rates.  Remember that?  I told a congressional committee that the time would come, eventually, when we would have to stop raising interest rates.  Of course, the expectation of an immediate rate change went right through the market, and I was completely flabbergasted by the inability of the markets to understand plain English.  [Laughter] But, unfortunately, thats reality.  So I think there would be a risk of suggesting that we were preparing to exit.  In this case, we are taking very substantial steps to address this particular issue, not just in testimony.  Our current plan is to have a significant description of exit strategy, tools, and so on, in the Monetary Policy Report, which would obviously be available to everyone in more detail than I could give in a short testimony.  So I would recommend dropping the last sentence. 
 We had some original language on tapering, and I think the problem that we were having with it was theres no way to describe our plans to taper without essentially determining at this point that we are almost certainly going to stop.  We may well do that, but I think if we can maintain that optionality for one more meeting it would probably be a good idea.  I think we could stop the Treasury program flat, or we could say we are doing $30 billion a month the rest of the year, or whatever, but I dont think that we need to take that decision yet. Two related things. President Yellen, supported by President Rosengren, brought up the mortgage rate issue, and I think she had two objectives.  One was to point to an important factor; the other was to kind of tone down the cheeriness of the first paragraph.  I have a specific concern with the mortgage rate sentenceif we say that mortgage rates are a big problem, thats going to signal something about our asset purchase program, Im afraid, so thats a concern that I would have. But I do understand the issue about general tone.  Let me just raise this for consideration. The second sentence in alternative B, Conditions in financial markets have generally improved in recent months, and indicators of consumer and business sentiment have risen, is obviously a very positive sentence and one that has no parallel in the April statement.  We could, if people like, either strike the sentence entirely, or, perhaps to recognize that there has been general improvement in financial markets, strike the second part about consumer and business sentiment, which would change the tone a bit.  I dont know if that would satisfy the need. Governor Tarullo mentioned this as well.  Is there any response to that thought? MR. TARULLO. I would find striking the sentence useful.  I think it would balance it a little bit better. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Striking the whole sentence, is everyone okay with that? MR. EVANS. The entire sentence? 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No? MR. LACKER. I think the financial conditions have improved is worth having. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I would cut that second half of the sentence. MR. STERN. I would drop the second part of it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. So what Im hearing is drop the second half, is that okay? President Yellen, does that sound okay? MS. YELLEN. Yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Brian will end the sentence after in recent months and strike the part about sentiment.  I think that is all that was on the table.  As noted, it is somewhat more upbeat.  It does drop the concern about deflation, although it does say subdued for some time, which is a strengthening of what we said last time.  And, of course, it does refer appropriately to the adjustmentsthe credit and liquidity programswhich will be 
followed up on Thursday. Any other comments? If not, Debbie, would you take the roll? MS. DANKER. Yes. The vote covers the statement thats in the packet that was handed out today, with two changes.  One is dropping the phrase and indicators of consumer and business sentiment have risen.  The other is dropping the bracketed sentence at the bottom. In addition, the vote covers the directive from page 69 of the Bluebook, with one amendment:  That directive had included the sentence stating that the Desk is expected to purchase at least $500 billion in agency MBS by the end of the second quarter of this year.  Given that it is June 24, and they already have purchased $500 billion, that sentence has now been changed to, The Desk is expected to purchase up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the year. So it just covers the full year amount. Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes 
  Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes Governor Kohn  Yes President Lacker  Yes President Lockhart  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes President Yellen   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  The next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, August 11 and 12. Let me remind you that you have until 5:00 p.m. tomorrow to submit any revisions to your projections based on data that you had available at the meeting. At this point, I will formally adjourn the meeting.  Lunch is available, if youd like to come.  Those of you who have to leave, by all means do so.  But those of you who are able to stay, I would be happy to talk a bit about the regulatory reform plan and its implications for the Fed, and then we can have some discussion of that informally.  Thank you. END OF MEETING 
             
 
  _______________   Attended Tuesdays session only. Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 1112, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 11, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday August 12, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Slifman, Sullivan, and Wilcox, Associate Economists Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. George, Acting Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors 
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
  
    
     
      
 
 
_______________   Attended Tuesdays session only. Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ms. Liang, Messrs. Reifschneider, and Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Messrs. Leahy and Nelson, Associate Directors, Divisions of International Finance and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors Mr. Carpenter, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  
Ms. Wei, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Mr. Sniderman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Mr. McAndrews, Ms. McLaughlin, Messrs. Rudebusch, Sellon, Tootell, and Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, San Francisco, Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively Messrs. Burke, Dotsey, Koenig, and Pesenti, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Dallas, and New York, respectively Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
                                                      1The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on August 11-12, 2009 August 11Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  Today is the last meeting for our colleague Gary Stern. Gary first attended the FOMC meeting as a staffer in 1982 and then was appointed President in March 1985. To provide some cultural context, in 1982 the top grossing movie was An Officer and a Gentleman, followed closely by Tootsie.  [Laughter.]  The leading hit song was Physical by Olivia Newton-John.  [Laughter.] We are in a different world, I think. Gary, you have attended 218 regular FOMC meetings, so you are the most senior member of this Committee by a small margin of six years.  That is a remarkable record, and you have provided a great deal of collegiality, insight, and wisdom over that period, and we want to thank you for that. But we will thank you in more substantial way at the September meeting.  So thank you. [Applause] As has been our custom, this is a joint BoardFOMC meeting.  So I need a motion to close the meeting.  MR. KOHN. So moved. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Well begin with staff presentationsfirst, with open market operations by Brian Sack, followed by Q&A, and then some additional presentations. Brian. MR. SACK.1 Thank you. I should start with a warning that Im going to talk for a pretty long time.  I apologize in advance.  Prices of risky assets have continued to recover at an impressive pace, boosted by a more optimistic assessment of economic prospects and by favorable news on corporate earnings.  The advance in equity prices, shown in the top left panel of the first exhibit, was particularly sharp, with broad indexes up 12 percent to 15 percent since the last FOMC meeting.  Equity prices were supported by sizable second-quarter earnings surprises that spanned a range of sectors. As shown in the top right, over three-quarters of S&P 500 companies posted 
        positive earnings surprises in the quarterabout the highest percentage observed over the past fifteen years.  At the same time, investors continued to become more optimistic about economic prospects.  The responses to our dealer survey indicated that market participants raised their forecasts for second-half growth and saw fewer downside risks to those forecasts. Given the news on earnings and the economy, investors perceptions of risk declined further, as indicated by the drop in the implied volatility of equity prices, the middle left panel.  Corresponding with that shift, investors showed a greater willingness to hold risky assets.  Retail investors, for example, have been reallocating large amounts of capital out of the safest asset classes, such as money market mutual funds, as shown in the middle right panel.  That capital appears to be making its way into a range of riskier asset classes, including equity and fixed-income funds both here and abroad. Given this shift in risk appetite, corporate bond spreads continued to narrow sharply, as shown in the bottom left panel, with the spread on the investment-grade index declining about 75 basis points and that on the high-yield index declining 
nearly 250 basis points since the last meeting.  Other risky asset classes, such as emerging-market debt and stocks, have also benefited. The panel to the right suggests that the dollar has also been strongly influenced by shifts in investor risk appetite. In particular, there has been a tight relationship between the dollar and risky asset prices, here captured by an emerging-market equity index, with the dollar appreciating last fall as investors attempted to move into safe 
assets and depreciating more recently as risk appetite returned.  On net, the dollar has fallen 1 percent to 2 percent on a broad, trade-weighted basis over the intermeeting period. The increased optimism about the economic outlook has coincided with favorable developments in the financial sector.  Share prices of large financial institutions rose substantially, as shown in the top left panel of exhibit 2, in response to robust earnings reports. Those earnings were fueled by strong profits in trading and investment banking activity.  The durability of those sources of revenue is 
questionable, but that did not seem to trouble investors. Earnings results for smaller and regional financial institutions were not as strong.  Those institutions benefited little from the robust trading gains that helped large firms.  Moreover, some regional banks posted greater-than-expected loan loss provisions for consumer loans, and many of them have considerable exposure to commercial real estate and construction loans.  Despite those hurdles, regional banks managed to meet their earnings expectations on average, and their share prices performed as well as those of larger firms over the intermeeting period. The difficulties at CIT that surfaced in mid-July highlighted the fact that financial institutions can still run into difficulties.  Nevertheless, financial markets continued to 
       function well throughout that episode. Moreover, investors perceptions of counterparty risk in the financial sector improved notably over the intermeeting period. CDS spreads for major financial institutions moved lower, by 50 to 200 basis points in most cases, as shown in the top right.  Moreover, the spread of LIBOR over the OIS rate, the middle left, continued to shrink, with the three-month spread falling below 30 basis points. At those maturities shown, spreads have reached levels that many thought would constitute the post-crisis normal.  Longer-term spreads, however, still remain elevated. One hurdle that the financial sector faces going forward is the expiration of the FDICs temporary liquidity guarantee program (or TLGP) on October 31.  The TLGP has allowed financial institutions to issue debt at a much lower cost than they would have otherwise paid, as indicated in the middle right panel.  Financial firms currently have $330 billion of outstanding debt under the program, with maturities out to three 
years. As that debt matures and has to be rolled over into new securities, these firms will likely face higher financing costs.  However, given that the maturity of that debt 
is spread out and that firms have been making efforts to reduce their reliance on the program, market participants do not currently anticipate any problems around its 
termination. This argument raises a broader point to be considered.  While money markets and financial markets more broadly have healed to a great degree, the improvement has been conditioned on a number of government support programsmany of which are scheduled to expire over the next six months.  Over the period between now and February 1, in chronological order, the markets will need to digest the end of the Treasurys money market guarantee program, the FDICs TLGP, the Feds large-scale asset-purchase (LSAP) program in Treasuries, the Feds MMIFF, the Treasurys purchases of agency MBS, the Feds LSAP programs in agency debt and MBS, the Treasurys credit facility for the GSEs (or GSECF), the Feds CPFF, AMLF, PDCF, and TSLF, and potentially the Treasurys TARP authority.  The good news is that we 
will all benefit from some much-needed acronym relief; [laughter] the bad news is that there are many risks involved.  The expiration of any one of these programs individually seems manageable, but it is more challenging to judge the effects of removing them all together.  That is one reason that we want to continue to monitor markets closely with this in mind. As shown in the bottom panels, securitized credit markets also improved over the intermeeting period.  Here the story very directly involves the effects from government programs aimed at supporting those markets.  The consumer ABS market has made considerable strides in the right direction.  ABS spreads narrowed further, 
as shown to the left, and new issuance continued at a decent clip.  These developments have been driven importantly by the ongoing support from the TALF facility. The July and August TALF subscriptions for ABS involved about $21 billion of TALF-eligible issuance, of which about $12 billion was financed 
through the facility. Improvements in the CMBS market have generally been slower, but the market has reacted favorably to recent news about the inclusion of CMBS in 
       the TALF program and in the Treasurys PPIP program.  As shown to the right, CMBS spreads have narrowed significantly since the last FOMC meeting. However, spreads are still very wide by historical standards, and there has been no new issuance. With commercial real estate prices falling, delinquencies rising, and considerable amounts of CMBS coming due through 2012, this sector is likely to face considerable pressure for some time. As shown in the next exhibit, the positive sentiment reflected in recent asset-price movements put upward pressure on Treasury yields.  However, the changes were fairly modest, with coupon yields moving up 5 to 15 basis points, on net, over the 
intermeeting period.  The markets expectations for monetary policy steepened a touch, as reflected in the rates on federal funds and Eurodollar futures contracts, shown to the right. Our dealer survey helps to shed some more light on these policy expectations.  The middle panels show the distribution of outcomes for the federal funds rate that 
are perceived by the respondents for horizons of 12 months ahead (to the left) and 18 months ahead (to the right).  As can be seen, the modal forecast is for the federal 
funds rate to remain unchanged at the 0 to 25 basis point range, even at that longer horizon. However, one feature of being at the zero bound is that the risks tend to be skewed in only one direction. The distributions show that respondents see some probability of higher rates, with that probability building as the horizon extends through 2010. This skewed risk profile has presumably pulled the futures rates up relative to what is perceived to be the most likely outcome.  Overall, investors 
apparently expect that the recovery will be anemic enough to allow the Fed to keep policy rates low well into 2010a view that has been supported by FOMC communications. Even though it is seen as still being a way off, market participants also focused on whether the Fed will face any difficulties exiting from its accommodative policy stance. Investors reportedly took some comfort from Chairman Bernankes op-ed piece in the Wall Street Journal and his monetary policy testimony on July 21.  This subject was also addressed by several other FOMC members over the intermeeting period, with market participants taking note of the consistency of the message.  The discussion of exit is presumably aimed, in part, at keeping longer-term inflation expectations anchored. As shown in the bottom left panel, measures of the five-year five-year-forward breakeven inflation rate rose over the intermeeting period and are near the upper end of the range seen over the past several years.  Our interpretation of the level of the breakeven rate is the same as it was at the last meetingthat it has moved up to levels that, while not alarming, show more balance in the perceived risks around the inflation outlook. As shown to the right, our dealer survey indicates that the perceived likelihood of CPI inflation from five to ten years ahead is the highest in the buckets from 1.5 percent to 2.5 percentlevels that are consisterm inflation projections of most FOMC members. 
     The next exhibit focuses on the Feds large-scale asset-purchase programs.  As shown in the top left panel, purchases in those programs have continued at a fairly robust monthly pace, though for each asset type the pace has slowed a touch.  For Treasuries, the slowing was intended to put the Desk on a trajectory to complete the $300 billion of purchases in September.  For agency securities and MBS, the slowing was driven by market conditions and concerns that a faster pace of purchases would risk some market disruption. In the Treasury market, there are no signs that our purchase program is having detrimental effects on market functioning.  As shown in the top right panel, the amount of dispersion in Treasury yields around our smoothed yield curve has diminished sharply from the very elevated levels that were seen late last year.  This 
improvement suggests that market participants have been increasingly willing and able to engage in arbitrage, limiting the difference in yields across securities with similar characteristics.  The improvement was also likely driven by the Feds 
participation in the market, as the Desk has often purchased less-liquid securities that were trading at yields well above the smoothed yield curve.  As shown in the middle left, trading volume in the Treasury market stabilized and began to pick up in recent months. Moreover, bidasked spreads ticked down for both repo and outright transactions in recent months.  Given these improvements in market functioning and the fact that our purchases are not disproportionately large in that market, we anticipate that there will be no significant disruption by the approaching winding down of the Feds purchases of Treasury securities.  As shown to the right, our Treasury purchases, while certainly sizable, are not overwhelming the market.  The scheduled total purchases for the program will constitute about 8 percent of the 
outstanding stock of Treasuries and 39 percent of the expected net issuance. As you know, the story is quite different for the purchases of agency debt and MBS. For MBS, scheduled Fed purchases will take up 28 percent of the outstanding stock of securities and more than three times the amount of net issuance.  Our purchases represent even larger shares for the agency debt market.  Given these sizes, the impact of the Desks purchases has been considerable in the agency and MBS markets.  As shown in the bottom left panel, those purchases have contributed to a 
dramatic decline in the option-adjusted spread of MBS to Treasury securities.  That spread has reached negative territoryan anomaly by historical standards.  The compression of the MBS spread and the associated pressures on the functioning of the 
MBS market make the exit from this program trickier than is the case for the Treasury 
program.  Some options for winding down the purchase programs will be discussed at 
the end of my briefing. In terms of economic effects, the MBS spread compression has strongly contributed to the FOMCs objective of providing stimulus to the economy.  As shown in the figure, the narrowing of the MBS spread has passed through to some 
degree to the conforming-mortgage spread, which has declined to around 175 basis pointsnear its historical norm.  That, in turn, has kept primary mortgage rates lower and supported housing activity. It may be difficult or problematic for the Desk to 
     collapse MBS spreads any further.  Thus, it is worth considering why conforming-mortgage spreads have only retraced to their historical norm and not further.  There are two factors in play. First, the prepayment option that is afforded to households in their mortgages is very costly today.  That is, the option adjustment in computing the option-adjusted spread for MBS is unusually large, mostly because long-term interest rate volatility has been very elevated.  Second, but less important, the primary secondary mortgage spread still remains somewhat elevated.  This likely reflects the reduction in the number of originators and the tighter credit conditions for warehousing those loans until securitization.  Even with these impediments, the compression of the conforming-mortgage spread has far outpaced that for other 
mortgage products, such as adjustable-rate mortgages.  As can be seen in the chart to the right, while the ARM spread has come off its peak, the improvement in this spread has been much more limited than is the case for fixed-rate mortgages.  This difference likely reflects the fact that, while the fixed-rate mortgage market has benefited appreciably from the Federal Reserves MBS purchase program, the adjustable-rate mortgage market has not.  I will return to this issue and potential changes to the Desks outright purchases of MBS at the end of my briefing. The ongoing purchase of assets has, by itself, continued to add to the size of the Feds balance sheet. As shown by the blue area in the top left panel of the last 
exhibit, outright securities holdings associated with those programs expanded to about $880 billionabout halfway toward the specified limit of $1.75 trillion.  In contrast to this ongoing expansion, the Feds liquidity programs continue to shrink, as shown by the orange area in the chart. This pattern largely reflects the substantial improvement in money markets that was discussed above, which has made these 
programs increasingly unattractive to users.  Overall, summing across these programs, the total size of the liquidity facilities has declined more than $1 trillion from its peak earlier this year.  This decline has just about offset the expansion of asset holdings in recent quarters, keeping the overall size of the balance sheet near the $2 trillion mark. Nevertheless, as shown in the table, we expect the balance sheet to begin to grow again going forward, as the steady rise in asset holdings and the ongoing expansion of the TALF will begin to outpace the declines in liquidity programs.  We currently project that, absent any policy changes, the balance sheet will reach a peak of just over $2.6 trillion by early 2010, after which it will begin to decline gradually. That concludes my summary of recent developments in financial markets and Desk operations. I will now turn to two specific issues regarding Desk operations 
going forward. The first issue is whether to include mortgage-backed securities backed by ARMs in the large-scale asset-purchase program.  A memo was circulated to you describing the arguments for and against a shift in this direction and recommending a specific structure for those purchases if the FOMC were to decide to move forward.  I will briefly review the main points from the memo. The case for including ARMs rests primarily on the fact that they are currently an expensive form of mortgage finance for households relative to fixed-rate mortgages.  
     As shown earlier, the Feds MBS purchases seem to have depressed the rates on fixed-rate mortgages, whereas the rates on ARMs have instead remained high in comparison.  Given that they are relatively expensive, the use of ARMs has come to a near stand-still.  Including ARMs in the asset-purchase program might be seen as beneficial for several reasons.  First, given that their spreads remain wide, purchasing ARMs-related securities might achieve a considerable improvement in their pricing and hence might provide more economic stimulus than using those same funds to purchase fixed-rate mortgages.  Second, it would eliminate the distortion that the Fed has created in households decisions between what mortgage product best suits their needs. Third, it would help the Desk to achieve the $1.25 trillion of MBS purchases while, at the margin, taking some pressure off the fixed-rate MBS purchases.  And fourth, because ARMs have lower duration than fixed-rate mortgages, it would reduce some of the interest-rate and income risk in the SOMA portfolio. However, there are also some counterarguments to consider.  First, any reallocation to ARMs, because it would come out of the total allocation of MBS purchases, could reduce the effect of the fixed-rate MBS purchases.  Second, it could involve certain political and reputational risks.  In particular, ARMs carry some stigma given their association with the recent housing and financial crisis, and Fed purchases may be seen as an endorsement of this product.  Third, encouraging 
households to move into ARMs may subsequently present an awkward situation when the FOMC begins to raise short-term interest rates.  Fourth, the ARM market is less liquid and less transparent than the fixed-rate MBS market, which raises some complications in the trading process and requires even more extensive reliance on external investment managers.  And fifth, given the size of the ARM market, the magnitude of potential purchases is limited. If the FOMC decides to move in this direction, the Desk recommends a program that would include 3/1, 5/1, 7/1, and 10/1 hybrid ARMs backed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. The majority of purchases would be expected to take place at the 5/1 sector, which has the largest amount of outstanding securities.  Purchases would include both newly issued and existing ARMs and would exclude interest-only ARMs. The program would start with a targeted amount of $25 billion in purchases, to be conducted over the remainder of the asset-purchase program, although the pace and eventual size of the program would be adjusted in response to market conditions.  This allocation would come out of the $1.25 trillion total amount of MBS purchases.  These are the broad principles that the Desk proposes for guiding ARMs purchases. Actual implementation will also require the Desk to make a 
number of decisions about specific operational issues, as summarized in the memo. The second issue for the FOMC to consider is the possibility of tapering the Desks asset purchases as the end dates for the asset-purchase programs approach.  The desirability of doing so depends on how one views the effects of those programs.  
The primary effect of those programs on market interest rates likely occurs through altering the stock of securities available to investors.  In a framework that considers only such stock effects, there would be no response to the end of the LSAP 
     programs as long as it was fully anticipated in the markets.  However, it is also possible that various market frictions allow the flow of purchases to have meaningful effects on market interest rates.  In this case, the cessation of purchases could create a discrete market adjustmentthe so-called cliff effect.  This latter concern may be particularly relevant when the Feds purchases are very large relative to the amounts of outstanding supply and net issuance in a market, as is the case for the agency debt and MBS programs.  If there is at least some possibility of flow effects, it may be desirable for the Fed to gradually reduce the pace of asset purchases rather than to terminate them abruptly.  The tapering could take place over a period of several months around the end of the programs.  This approach would allow any flow-related effects on the markets to be spread out, helping to facilitate a smooth market adjustment to a post-LSAP regime.  Moreover, as long as the FOMCs commitment to the overall stock of purchases is unchanged, this strategy should have no 
detrimental effects under the stock-based perspective on markets.   In order to taper purchases and still reach the full amount of the programs, the Committee would have to extend the end dates of the programs. The only other alternative would be to increase the pace of purchases today in order to reduce it later, but this approach could disrupt market functioning over the near term.  The Desk recommends a short extension of the Treasury program to the end of October, to allow purchases to be tapered off over a period of two months or so.  For agency debt and MBS purchases, the Desk believes that a slightly longer tapering period is appropriate. The Desk would recommend extending those programs to the end of the first quarter, with the intention of beginning to taper off purchases in a meaningful way in December. For each program, the Desk would decide on a more precise schedule for reducing purchases while still hitting the total amount of purchases decided by the FOMC. The Desk recommends reaching the full allocation of purchases for Treasuries and MBS in order to validate the markets expectations that have had beneficial effects on financial conditions.  It is less important, in our view, to reach the full allocation for agency securities. At this juncture, the FOMC has to decide only on its strategy for the Treasury program, given that its expiration date is approaching.  The agency and MBS programs are not scheduled to expire until year-end.  However, market participants 
are beginning to discuss the exit from these other programs as well, and they are likely to draw some inference about how these programs will be wound down fromthe approach taken with Treasuries. These considerations will be raised again in the discussion of policy options and statements by Brian Madigan tomorrow. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Questions for Brian? President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. I am looking at exhibit 4, figure 24, on mortgage spreads.  I just want to understand your interpretation of this chart.  I see toward the end here that conforming spreads come down dramatically and the ARMs come down dramatically, but you said that you thought 
 the purchase program did not have an effect on the ARMs.  That means just that the level is high? MR. SACK. Right. MR. BULLARD. What about the sharp downturn that followed the other line? MR. SACK. So thats right. I was focusing on the level.  The level of the conforming spread is not far from historical norms, but the level of the ARM spread is still extremely elevated compared with historical norms, although it has improved.  I would interpret the improvement as being driven not by Fed purchase programs but just by the broader recovery in 
markets.  You point out that it is not that different a magnitude from the improvement in conforming-mortgage spreads, but I think that probably has to do with the fact that it was starting from such a wider, more disrupted level. MR. BULLARD. I expect ARMs to be unpopular in the stage of the business cycle when interest rates are low and people are talking about, well, when are you going to tighten, as opposed to being in the stage of the business cycle when rates are higher and might come down at some point. MR. SACK. Well, I think that would presume that households have a more efficient outlook on monetary policy than the bond market more broadly.  Obviously, the yield curve in 
Treasuries or in mortgages should reflect the expected path of short-term interest rates, so I 
would think that normally the market would be priced in a way to make households relatively indifferent, in terms of the risk, between ARMs and fixed-rate mortgages. The point is that different households may have different preferences based on their different situations.  So if the purchase programs have had a very large effect on one product and absolutely no effect on the 
 other, it is creating a distortion that does not allow households to choose efficiently between the two. MR. BULLARD. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. I have a question and then a point to make.  The question is with regard to the size of the population of ARMs that are available.  You mentioned in your paper that we would eliminate interest-only ARMs.  Is it roughly $200 billion that are eligible here in terms of the total population?  Is that correct? MR. SACK. Of interest only? 
MR. FISHER. No, of not interest-only ARMs.  We would not pursue interest-only ARMs. MR. SACK. Sorry. Yes, that is correct. There is about $400 billion of ARMs in total.  About $200 billion is interest only. In the memo, we presented the arguments for and against interest-only ARMs. In the end, we made a recommendation, but I certainly think we viewed that as an open issue for the Committee to discuss. MR. FISHER. The point is actually based on the question because, if you look at the Greenbook, Part 2, page III-12, there is a chart of delinquencies on prime mortgages, and the delinquency rate on variable-rate mortgages is four times that of fixed.  So here is the question: Do we want to be seen expanding our balance sheet and our asset purchases for poorly performing mortgages such as these or encourage households to take out this kind of mortgage now that they have a 12 percent past-due rate, or is there a chicken-and-egg issue here? Im curious as to what your opinion is because that is one of the cons you did not mentionthat is, 
 that ARMs have a much higher delinquency rate.  Do we want to be perceived as assisting that weak market, or will our assistance lead to an improved market?  Whats your opinion? MR. SACK. I guess I wasnt thinking of the ARMs purchases as really affecting the risk profile of the outstanding securities.  Obviously, those delinquency rates are very high.  They are very high for a lot of reasons, not necessarily that those products are ARMs but rather that those ARMs are sold with very lax underwriting standards.  So I think a benefit of purchasing ARMs is not to bring back the kind of mortgage conditions that we saw previously but just to make these a viable product if used with responsible underwriting going forward. In terms of whether to hold assets that have those delinquencies, we are talking about buying only GSE-sponsored securities. So part of the answer is that we are getting credit protection from that and basically we are buying securities where any credit risks and issues like that are already priced in. So I do not really see it as a portfolio issue that the delinquencies are going up but more as a reputational issue about whether the Fed wants to be involved in products that are still very visibly associated with the housing bubble and the problems that ensued. MR. FISHER. Just so I understandagain, out of, say, a population of $200 billion, what percentage of that is GSE and what is non-GSE? Do we know? MR. SACK. The $200 billion is GSE-sponsored.  In total, theres $400 billion of GSE-sponsored ARMs.  I believe that outside the GSEs, there is about $1trillion of ARMs outstanding. MR. FISHER. Were talking only about GSE-sponsored ARMs. MR. SACK. Correct. MR. FISHER. At least half are not interest only. MR. SACK. Correct. 
MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One approach to addressing some of these issues would be to take only 5/1s or longer initial periods.  Then, you stay away from the 2/28s and 3/27s, and you dont have the issue that you have an incentive not to raise rates because that will not have any effect on a five-year fixed rate.  President Stern. MR. STERN. There is a two-hander over there. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Oh, sorry. President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN. Just in terms of the credit quality, if you look at the 5-, the 7-, and the 10-year, the credit scores for those are appreciably better than they are for the 30-year and the 15-year products actually. So following up on the Chairmans comment, I think that, if you focused on the 5, 7, and 10 rather than the 1 and 3, you have a very different risk profile, and it actually does tend to match up with the duration that many people plan on staying in their house5, 7, or 10 yearsrather than 30 years, which also has that advantage.  So it would recommend potentially thinking about starting with the 5, 7, and 10 rather than focusing on the 3and the 1, which have a different historical experience with default rates. MR. FISHER. Thank you. I think that is a very important point.  Thank you for addressing it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. 
MR. STERN. Yes. If we were to buy agency ARMs at the magnitude you are considering, what are your expectations for effects on rates and on volumes in that market? MR. SACK. Were starting with the $25 billion proposal.  It is going to be useful to compare that magnitude with the purchase program in fixed-rate MBS proportionally to that market.  With $25 billion, we are essentially buying a smaller portion of the outstanding stock.  
 We would be buying about 15 percent of the eligible outstanding stock compared with 25 to 30 percent for the fixed-rate program.  But we would be buying a much larger share of the gross issuanceabout double what we have seen for gross issuance so far this yearwhereas on the fixed-rate side, we are buying something like 75 to 100 percent of gross issuance.  We have calibrated it that way to be somewhat comparable, but I think that the question about what market effects might ensue has to do with that gross issuance.  The possibility is that, once the ARM purchases begin, if the pricing improves, then of course youll see more ARM issuance, and that will give you some scope to raise the size of the program if that is seen as a good approach. In terms of what effect we might have on rates, I would not be surprised to see an effect in the 50 to 100 basis point range. The memo had some measures of the relative pricing of ARMs versus fixed-rate mortgages, and the deviations were 50 to 150 basis points of difference.  You can actually see in figure 24 that theres a considerable difference in the size of the spreads.  So given that this market is disrupted and given that it is relatively small, it wouldnt be surprising to have a very meaningful effect on the pricing.  With fixed-rate mortgages, we started from a very high spread in a market that was functioning poorly but not that poorly.  Here were talking about a market thats not functioning well at all, so I think we could really have a substantial effect by participating in the market. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a broad question that was stimulated by Brians discussion of the improvement in market functioning.  I wonder, Brian, if you could just offer more of a summary opinion on how much better things are in financial markets.  How far are we toward sustainable improvement?  You talked about the end of the government programs.  
   The Greenbook, as near as I can tell, still has the special financial factor add-ons to that, and Im just ultimately going to wonder where we are with that.  Its a little awkward because the Governors have the responsibility for assessing 13(3) conditions, and yet things feel markedly different from March 2008 or September 2008. Here we are in August 2009.  We have moved from general market dysfunction to something now that is better, and there is actually some market differentiation, where some markets are doing substantially better than others.  Theyre discriminatingwhether or not it is appropriate is the question.  So any additional color you could offer on that would be helpful to me. MR. SACK. In some of the bigger liquid marketsTreasuries, MBSweve obviously seen considerable improvement from late last year and early this year, and I think enough improvement to where we are now perhaps just on a slower ongoing trajectory for improvement.  We are not back to where things were before the crisis.  Bidasked spreads are still a bit wider than they were. One thing thats very different is that trade sizes seem to be a lot smaller.  So even at the quoted bidasked spreads, market depth is much more limited.  But its certainly not bad. It may take some time to get back to that.  We may never actually get back to that.  So I think you would have to say that those markets in general are functioning quite well.  The corporate bond market as well.  We have had a lot of corporate bond issuance, a lot of improvement in pricing.  So that looks quite decent.  The markets that are still very disrupted, as I mentioned in the briefing, are the securitized credit markets.  There market activity is very dependent on the TALF.  There was basically nothing going on in CMBS until the TALF and the PPIP came along, and what we have seen since the TALF and the PPIP is some pickup in tradingactually some encouraging signsbut no new issuance still.  So I think that those markets will take quite some time to come back. 
 MR. MADIGAN. Two other points may be worth making.  One is that, of course, credit intermediation through the banking sector seemingly remains still quite impaired, judging by actual credit flows and by responses to things like the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  Also, as Brian mentioned in his briefing, theres still a tremendous range of support thats being provided to financial markets and institutions.  It is difficult to know exactly how to factor that in, but surely that is still providing support. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER. I would like to go back to the point about the 3/1s, 5/1s, and 7/1s and whateverhow that affects the credit scores, a point that President Fisher raised.  If we were to go in and concentrate our purchases in some subset of these ARMs, hence driving their rates 
down, then we expect the market response to that would be that maybe those credit scores wouldnt stay the same, that there would be a response where mortgage brokers and others would help direct people into those products for which we are trying to drive down the yields and make them more attractive.  I think there is going to be an endogenous response to that, and we have to be careful that we dont put ourselves in a position by which we are creating even more distortions than we already are by picking products in individual securities and trying to affect their individual prices and not others.  I think that is a very dangerous position for us to be in, and we end up perhaps aggravating problems and actually preventing markets from doing the healing that they need to do rather than just helping them along. My point is that there will be a demand response to this price change and that we cannot necessarily assume that we wont be, in effect, driving people to particular products and away from others, and I think thats something we have to be very, very careful of.  So I just think we should be very dubious about our strategy here in terms of making this work.  Also it runs a risk 
politicallynot economically, but politicallyand I think this is probably what President Fisher was suggesting. Actually the staff memo raised this issue.  Politically it looks as though were going into something that everybody has been condemning as part of our problem, and I think we should be very, very careful about that. So Im just wondering, Eric, do you really think there wouldnt be a demand response to our driving? If Brian is right and we can drive down the yields on the 5/1s and 7/1s by 100 basis points, do you think that there wouldnt be a demand response to that and, therefore, that credit 
scores might, in fact, decline as opposed to being high? MR. ROSENGREN. My observation on credit scores was based on the historical data that includes the last recession. As you can see from the charts, in the last recession, the rates were substantially lower than they are now. MR. PLOSSER. It wasnt much of a recession though. 
MR. ROSENGREN. Well, it was a different recession.  Im just saying that the observation on credit scores was based on a period in which actually we werent intervening and 
that was a recession. I think it is an open question as to who would take advantage of the program, but right now it looks as if the spreads are outsized relative to what they have been historically. So you might argue that some people who would prefer a five-year or a seven-year 
product now dont have a product thats functioning in the way that it has historically. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Just to amplify President Rosengrens remarks, we were already distorting the market by just buying fixed-rate mortgages. So you could argue that, if you were to purchase fives, sevens, and tens, actually youd be reducing the amount of distortion because youd be bringing those rates back into better alignment with where they have been 
 historically. So Im not convinced that the distortion argument goes against the ARM purchases.  I think you could argue just as strongly that it gives a case for the ARM purchases. MR. PLOSSER. So you create one distortion, and you fix it by creating other distortions to offset it? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right now you are pushing people into fixed-rate mortgages because those yields are so much lower than the ARM yields because youre intervening in the one market and not the other. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We are in the Q&A session for Brian.  [Laughter] We will have a chance to discuss these issues further, of course.  President Lacker, did you want to ask a question? MR. LACKER. Brian Sack, Im looking at chart 1 on page 7 of 8 of the memo that you distributed, which shows agency ARM issuance monthly beginning in 1994 and up through the present, and it looks as though in late 1998, early 1999, that there was a really strong dip.  Quantities got down exceptionally low, and then the same thing happened in 2001.  My memory is that those were occasions in which interest rates fell, and if I look at chart 1, it doesnt seem that surprising that ARM volumes are low.  Now, in chart 3, you show us the results of some of the regressions. The way it is described in the text, you say that you address this ARMfixed spread on the slope of the yield curve? MR. SACK. Right. MR. LACKER. But did you include the level of the yield curve? This goes back to President Bullards remark that it certainly seems as if you could look at the data and be forgiven for thinking that, when the overall yield curve is low, there is an effect depressing ARM rates because people think its going to be mean reverting rather than just a random walk. 
 MR. SACK. To my knowledge, we did not try the level of yields, and of course, chart 3 shows the outcome of just one model.  But I think the argument that ARMs look expensive to households seems pretty compelling.  I mean, you do not need a regression to tell you that; you can pretty much see it in chart 24. Even if activity tends to fall off when rates are low, we have to at least entertain the idea that the apparent expense of ARMsthe wide spread that we see todayis contributing to that falloff.  So its possible that the purchase program would bring the ARM spread in and make it more comparable with the fixed-rate spread but still households would choose fixed-rate mortgages because those rates are very low.  I think thats possible, and thats fine. I think one would argue, well, lets bring that spread down and then let households make that choice.  So in no way are we suggesting that you target some proportion of ARM issuance or push on this until you get ARM issuance back up.  We are just saying that, you could argue, Lets bring down what looks to be a very wide yield spread, and let households make that choice. MR. LACKER. If I could follow up, Mr. Chairmanyou used the word disrupted about the agency ARM market.  I am assuming that this yield spread and the quantities are part of the evidence that you would use to bolster that case.  So here is the question: It could be the case that you have qualitative observations bolstering the characterization as disruptedthings like market makers who have left the market, wider bidasked spreads, and the like.  But if it is just quantities and these spreads, I guess I find this less than compelling to qualify for the word disrupted, the way I usually think of that. More broadly, we did intervene in the fixed-rate securitization market.  We would have predicted that the intervention would increase the flow of credit to that sector and reduce the flow of credit to other sectors.  It is exactly what we would have expected. So there is going to be an endless supply of other sectors that, because of our 
intervention, now are seeing less credit than they otherwise would.  So are we on a treadmill here that we will do this and then we will find that interest-only ARMs really deserve some help, and we will do that?  What are the criteria here for drawing a boundary between where we are intervening and where we are not?  I am not sure I see it in the way you have laid out the pros and consit makes it seem as if we just assemble a pro and con list and see what wins each time. MR. SACK. That last question is certainly a tougher one than we aim to answer in the memo.  How far to go is a question for policymakers.  However, let me say something about the liquidity issue and whether the ARMs market is disrupted.  In general, you know, the ARM market is less liquid than the fixed-rate mortgage market.  The fixed-rate mortgage market trades on a TBA basis. That means that a bunch of securities can be delivered into a contract, and that adds a lot of liquidity to that market.  It is traded over an electronic trading platform, Tradeweb.  The ARM market is different. It trades much more on a specified pool basis.  There is no TBA. It is not on Tradeweb. It is literally a deal-driven market in which, to execute an order, you need to pick up a phone and talk to some dealers. MR. LACKER. It was this way before the crisis. MR. SACK. This is the way it was before and the way it is now.  So just in general the ARM market is less liquid than the fixed-rate mortgage market.  Today I think that difference is greater than normal, and you can see that in terms of bidasked spreads.  The bidasked spreads for ARMs, for comparable-sized trades, are four to eight times what they are for fixed-rate mortgages. I think that difference has gotten greater, and one reason for that is that you have a market in which there is just no new issuance, so there is no flow that is creating liquidity in 
trading. So it is really a market thatI dont want to say it is completely dried up in terms of trading, but it has suffered in terms of liquidity. MR. LACKER. Well, I think the bidasked spread in any market would go up if the volume went down.  I wonder what happened in 98, 99, and 2001 to the bidasked spread.  Do you have a benchmark against which to compare those bidasked spreads and view them as too high, or is it just a byproduct of the low issuance? MR. SACK. We dont have a nice time series of bidasked spreads.  In part because there is no electronic platform, we dont have a nice data source to give us a long historical perspective. MR. LACKER. You dont know if it is high relative to what it would be if it were efficiently undisrupted? MR. SACK. No. I am saying that, given the lack of liquidity by these measures, given the lack of issuance, and given the cheap pricing, I think the evidence in general supports the idea that, if the Fed were to purchase those securities and encourage new issuance, you would see a pickup in liquidity, and you would see these liquidity measures improve. MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman, I have another question about the asset purchase programs, but I understand the discussion here has been about this, so I defer my question until later. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Yellen, a two-hander? MS. YELLEN. I just wanted to comment on President Lackers question and Brians response and say that our staff also undertook independent analysis of this issue and estimated an econometric model trying to assess how distorted the ARM and fixed-rate mortgage spreads are relative to their benchmarks.  That included more than the slope of the yield curve.  It was a 
 principal-component analysis that implicitly included levels and other things.  And it supports the conclusion that Brian drew based on the exercise that he undertook.  In fact, our staff concluded that the fixed-rate mortgage rate relative to its benchmark is now reasonably normal and the ARM rate is on the order of 150 basis points higher than you would expect, given the entire constellation of rates. Another thing that they did was to estimate an econometric model using individual data from the McDash data set to try to get a sense of how the existing differentials are affecting choice between conventional and adjustable-rate mortgages, and they found that the essentially no-issuance, no take-up on adjustable-rate mortgages is precisely what you would expect based on the current constellation of rates. Finally, they tried to estimate what the likely responsiveness would be if we were able to push the differential down about 150 basis points or other magnitudes to more-normal levels by entering this market.  They tried to look at those borrowers who were currently in the mortgage market because historically you have had subprime borrowers with very low FICO scores who arent in the mortgage market now.  So they controlled for a lot of borrower characteristics and tried to compute what the response would be of borrowers who were in the market as of early 2009, and they found a very high interest-elasticity.  In fact, they computed that, if we could drive that rate down 150 basis points, you should see the share of ARMs versus fixed-rate mortgages rise to about 35 percent. I offer that just as a clarifying comment.  MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. LACKER. If I can just follow up:  First, let me say that that sounds like admirable research, and I enjoy benefiting from it, President Yellen.  This brings to mind another aspect of 
 the adjustable/fixed-rate margin.  My understanding of the empirics of mortgage losses over the last couple of years is that they have revealed that a substantial selection effect goes on in the choice between adjustable and fixed-rate mortgages.  And what we know of models with adverse selection suggests that the relative frequency of good types and bad types in the canonical model is going to influence equilibrium pricing in those models.  So you would expect that, if there is more in the general population of the riskier types, you might get higher risk premiums on the ARMs because they are selected by the riskier types of agents, and this could be a factor explaining the high spreads on adjustable-rate mortgages now.  Whether it would be picked up in an atheoretical principal component analysis or not, I dont know.  I just mention that as something that has arisen out of the data recently.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let the record show that President Lackers reference to ARMs dealers had to do with mortgages and not with other things.  [Laughter] A short intervention, President Plosser? MR. PLOSSER. Yes, a short one. Brian, the way you have described the ARM market and how it is not functioning the way we thinkor at least some estimates suggest that it mightI wonder if New York and the staff have on their agenda what the next market is.  If I listen to what you say, we ought to be in the jumbo market.  And I am wondering, with the very high spreads in the jumbo market, can we expect to see a proposal from the staff that we are going to buy jumbos now in order to get their spreads down? MR. SACK. No. [Laughter] 
MS. MCLAUGHLIN. We are not allowed to. 
MR. PLOSSER. The argument is the same, though, isnt it? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You cant buy jumbos.  They are not GSE guaranteed. 
   MR. SACK. Yes, they have to be GSE guaranteed.   MR. PLOSSER. We could think of a way, couldnt we? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, no, no, no. [Laughter] 
MR. SACK. There is another point, which is that the expansion of the conforming-mortgage limit has actually brought what would have been a lot of jumbo new issuance into the conforming-mortgage market.  Moreover, most fixed-rate MBS pools can have up to 10 percent of jumbo conforming mortgages in them.  So the asset-purchase programs already in place are already helping to support some high-balance mortgages. MR. PLOSSER. Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. In a sense this is going to carry the discussion where it has already been, but if I remember right, we had some discussion of this at the last FOMC meeting and went against going forward with it at the time.  And given my sense of things, although things remain fragile in the housing market and elsewhere, things have improved.  They are better than they were. It is not that I mind having it brought back, but I am wondering, Brian, what has happened between the last FOMC and this FOMC that makes this worth bringing back for discussion? The market is not perfect yet.  We still have this distortion in the ARMs, but there is some improvement showing.  I think that the markets will straighten out with time, especially if the economy is on a healing path.  Is there enough need for this to accelerate the recovery or settle out the markets to bring this back and reconsider it at this meeting? MR. SACK. Just to be clear, we are not bringing up this issue because of something that has happened, a worsening of conditions, over the intermeeting period.  I think we left the last meeting thinking that this was an open issue and that we wanted to present the Committee with 
the full range of arguments on both sides and let the Committee decide it.  You know, we are well into the program.  We are at a point where people are beginning to discuss the exit.  Maybe there is an issue about whether it is the right time to be making changes like this, but we just wanted to present the case. In terms of timing, given the size of the program we are talking about, there is no issue. It would be very easy to get this program done in the size we have talked about, in the time left. MR. HOENIG. Thank you very much, Brian. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just to be clear, we will survey everybodys views either in the go-round or, if you dont express a view in the go-round, we will check with you after the meeting.  So everyones thoughts will be heard. MR. HOENIG. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Brian?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Yes. This has to do with our asset purchase program.  I want to refer to chart 25, Balance Sheet Assets by Category, on the last page of your presentation.  It looks as if, when we buy our large-scale assets, short-term liquidity facility usage goes down.  That suggests that maybe banks have a certain amount of reserves they want to hold, and when we buy stuff, they have to borrow less to have the reserves they want to hold.  In fact, reserves went 
down in the last intermeeting period, and we keep missing the forecast of reserve balances and short-term liquidity facility usage on the low side as we ramp up these purchases.  My understanding is that you go around facility by facility and construct these forecasts, and then 
reserves sort of pop out as the residual. Now we are going to keep purchasing assets, and my understanding is that the forecast says that we are going to take reserve balances from $700 billion to $1.4 trillion. 
 There is an interesting memo by Charles Sims and Kevin McDonald on the MarketSource website that forecasts balances for the large banks and for various bank categories like community banks.  My sense is that there is a sort of judgmental forecast as to how the shares of total reserve balances are going to change, but it has Bank of Americathis is the largest holdergoing from $140 billion to something over $250 billion.  I checked this morning.  They are planning to reduce their reserve balances over the next several months, and the reason is that the cost of carry is too high.  I mean, it is valuable to them in terms of the liquidity it gives them; but at 25 basis points, it is below their cost of funds, and they are planning to shift funds into cash equivalents, like Treasuries and agencies, that are higher yielding and have a lower cost to carry. So my question is, What effects do you expect, if this hypothesis is true, of our expanding large-scale asset purchases enough that short-term liquidity facility usage is driven to zero and yet reserve balances keep going up?  What yields are going to change to get banks to 
hold this? How does that square with the Greenbooks forecast that yields increase rather than decrease over the period?  And how much stimulus does that provide, in some broad sense? I realize that is a tall order, but I am just raising the question of whether there is a discrete change in the sense of the stimulus we provide as we cross that threshold.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is how quantitative easing works.  You induce banks to substitute away from reserves, but they have to hold the reserves in the end. MR. LACKER. Right. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So the yields change, assuming that we would be more accommodative.  And that is exactly what we are trying to do. 
    MR. LACKER. Well, I argued in January that is the effect of what we were having to do, so I am aware of that.  But we didnt sign up to do an infinite amount of it.  We want to do the right amount. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. MR. LACKER. And as economic conditions changeand I argued this in January as wellwe need to adapt, just the way we adapt our funds rate when the funds rate is operative.  We ought to be thinking about how much stimulus we are supplying.  So the question arises, Do we know what kind of stimulus we are going to be supplying?  Apparently, the banking system isnt planning on doubling their holding of reserves any time soon. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, these asset-purchase plans are not set in stone.  We began them in March at a time of very weak conditions.  We have reviewed them at each 
meeting.  And if we decide there is too much stimulus in the economy, given our projections, then we can reduce them. So they are a choice variable at each meeting.  But you have just described exactly the way the quantitative easing part of this is supposed to work. MR. LACKER. Yes, I know. But is this consistent?  I mean, this suggests that, when we cross this threshold, there will be a discrete downward effect on these longer yields.  We may want that; we may not.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont see any reason why it would be discontinuous.  I think it is continuous. MR. LACKER. Well, because there is a discontinuity in the use of our short-term liquidity facilities at zero. MR. CARPENTER. Just one minor clarification, though, President Lacker.  Some of the facilities, if we take two of them in particularwell, just take the CPFF as a single example.  At 
   its peak, the CPFF was very, very largewell over $200 billion.  And it wasnt necessarily just banks borrowing that. As that usage came down, that was not in the first instance a bank deciding that they have access to funds in one case and so they are going to give it up in another case. So it is not obvious that it is quite as tight a link of reduced use of liquidity facilities, simply because of the increase in the provision of balances from that asset purchase. MR. LACKER. No, I understand that the CPFF is in this orange part here.  And to some extent that is different from the PCF and the TAF, where it is driven by their demand for funds, I think. MR. SACK. Yes. I would just add, as Chairman Bernanke said, that the example you gave of Bank of America is basically describing the portfolio balance effect, which underlies the stock effect that I talked about.  Basically, the system as a whole has to be forced to hold these liquid assets instead of longer-term assets.  To make participants happy to do that, the yields on the longer-term assets have to be lower. The way we have thought about it is that this is all priced in already. If you believe a stock effect, where the effects are based on the expectation of what the stocks are going to be, completing the asset purchase programs that are already announced is going to force this portfolio reallocation.  But markets tend to bring it forward, so you dont get the flow effect as it happens. You get it priced up front.  This flow versus stock 
issue is something that we are conscious of, and maybe you are raising the fact that the flow issue also depends on the level of reserves, and so we are still going to get some effect there.  But we tend to think of most of the effect as coming through the expected stock, even though we allow some possibility of flow effects and make recommendations for policymakers to hedge 
themselves in case there are these flow effects. 
       MR. LACKER. Strange as this may sound, I am sort of willing to entertain the notion that the yield curve doesnt build in this sort of effect yet.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You have raised a good point, President Lacker, about the substitutability between these two forms of stimulus, and I think we ought to continue to think about that. If there are no objections, I would like to go on to the next portion.  We have some staff presentations on reserve management, which bears exactly on some of these issues, and then a presentation on the TALF.  So let me turn first to Chris Burke.  We will hear four presentations, and then we will have Q&A for all four.  Chris. MR. BURKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The FOMC has discussed using reverse repo operations in scale as part of its strategy for eventually draining reserves and raising short-term interest rates from their current low levels.  This briefing will provide an update on operational readiness, describe some of the key aspects of the program and their implications, and briefly discuss the importance of counterparties, including a discussion of the special case of conducting reverse repos with the GSEs. An important operational aspect of large-scale reverse repos is the form of settlement.  There are three different types of settlementdelivery versus payment, held in custody, and triparty. The Federal Reserve has used all three, but for large-scale reverse repos, triparty settlement is the only feasible choice.  In triparty repo, both the borrower and the lender have cash and collateral accounts at the same triparty repo agent, either JPMorgan Chase or Bank of New York Mellon.  There are several reasons why triparty settlement is required.  Most important, it provides access to the wide range of institutional cash investors who use triparty repo.  In addition, triparty agents provide collateral management services for term repo and other services that current FRBNY systems are not set up to provide. A Federal Reserve reverse repo in the triparty structure, however, is not sufficient to drain reserves, as at the end of the day the funds that the Fed borrowed are in the Federal Reserve account of the clearing bank.  To drain reserves, therefore, the clearing banks must take the additional step of sending the funds to the Fed at the end of the day, and because of the nature of triparty, the Fed must return the funds to the clearing banks each morning.  These additional steps create operational and legal complexities for the program.  As such, the staff believes that the Desk should establish a complete operational and legal system for conducting reverse repos using Treasury and direct agency debt first, before designing the ability to conduct reverse repos using agency MBS collateral, which involves further complexities. 
       An initial reverse repo program with the capacity of as much as $100 billion, using primary dealers as counterparties and Treasury and direct agency debt as collateral, is expected to be available in early September.  This has required the establishment of new tools to manage the operational aspects of the program, new legal documentation with both the clearing banks and the dealers, and negotiations with the clearing banks on the fees involved.  Because the main services that triparty repo agents perform involve the management and pricing of collateral, the triparty fees are paid by the collateral providers. Even though the Federal Reserve has been using the triparty system for repo transactions for years without paying fees, the use of triparty repo to drain reserves will require the Fed to pay fees to the clearing banks.  Initial discussions with the clearing banks suggest that annual triparty fees for a reverse repo portfolio of $500 billion are likely to be in the range of $10 million to $15 million.  Current discussions with the clearing banks are focused on eliminating 
the differences in proposed fees from the two clearing banks and reducing the final fees. Negotiations could take up to another month to complete and document. The legal and fee groundwork laid for reverse repos using Treasury and agency debt should also cover the use of agency mortgage-backed securities.  However, new operational processes will need to be designed and implemented for agency MBS, primarily because of our use of investment managers and custodial accounts for managing our agency MBS holdings.  We anticipate that the extension to agency MBS collateral should be completed in the fourth quarter. The most important issue regarding the potential scope of the reverse repo program is the set of counterparties.  Our current open market operations are conducted with only the 18 primary dealers.  However, primary dealers tend to be net borrowers, not net lenders, in the repo market, meaning that as a group they are a poor fit as reverse repo counterparties.  Further, dealers have limited capacity to act as intermediaries between the Fed and other cash investors, as doing so would gross up their balance sheets. Based on discussions with about half the primary dealer community, total dealer capacity for reverse repos is expected to be only about $100 billion and perhaps only half of that on month-ends.  Dealers simply do not have the balance sheet capacity to handle the size of program being contemplated.  Thus a program of any size will require an expansion of the counterparty list.  The identification and establishment of an expanded set of counterparties, which is what would enable the expansion of the program beyond its initial $100 billion size, should be complete by year-end.   One area of exploration related to expanded counterparties is a reverse repo program focused on the GSEs, in particular Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, and the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks.  Nearly all have expressed a willingness to consider engaging in reverse repos with the Fed, and current estimates suggest that a program targeted at these GSEs would be between $50 billion and $75 billion in size. The 
potential costs and benefits of a program of this nature, however, require more study, as the magnitude of the effect on the federal funds rate is not yet fully clear.  A $75 billion program would not substantially reduce the overall level of reserve 
      balances from their current and expected elevated levels.  And while it may be the case that removing these particular participants in the federal funds market would help increase federal funds rates in general, that conclusion is not obvious.  Staff members at the New York Fed and the Board are working to better understand the potential rate effects of such a program.  In addition, removing the GSEs from the brokered federal funds market would significantly shrink that market and make it more idiosyncratic and perhaps a less relevant indicator of broader funding conditions. These are issues that will have to be addressed when the FOMC considers the scope of the reverse repo program and the way it fits into a broader strategy for tightening financial conditions. My purpose today was simply to indicate some of the 
operational conclusions that we have reached to date and define some of the issues that policymakers will have to take into consideration going forward.  Thank you. 
Seth Carpenter will now update you on the term deposit facility. MR. CARPENTER. Thank you, Chris. A term deposit facility could be another part of the tool kit for implementing a decision to raise short-term interest rates.  Because a deposit facility would be created under the authority for paying interest on 
reserves, access would be limited to depository institutions and not, for example, the 
GSEs. This distinction is a clear difference from Chriss description of reverse repos.  Funds deposited in a term deposit facility would not be available to clear payments, satisfy reserve or clearing balance requirements, or be treated as balances for purposes of calculating overdraft fees. In essence, by shifting balances out of DIs master accounts, a deposit facility would lower excess reserves.   The quantity of excess reserves that could be absorbed by a deposit facility is unclear, though logically it should increase as the interest rate paid on term deposits rises. The staff is evaluating two potential approaches for setting the rate paid on term deposits.  The Federal Reserve could auction a fixed quantity of term deposits, 
with the rate established in the auction.  Alternatively, the Federal Reserve could post the interest rates that it will pay on term deposits, and DIs would decide what 
quantities they wish to deposit at those rates. In either case, the rate paid would be constrained by the statutory requirement that rates not exceed prevailing market rates.  The staff currently envisions that a deposit facility would be a somewhat blunt tool and be used to drain a block of reserve balato-day reserves management.  The auction-rate approach would likely give the Federal Reserve greater control over the quantity of term deposits than would a 
posted-rate facility. Such control might be desirable if other tools, such as reverse repos or asset sales, were to drain such a large quantity of reserves that precision over the level of reserves would become important again.  That said, under either approach, settlement would likely occur with a lag of at least one day, partly to enhance the predictability of the quantity of reserves.   In practice, the Federal Reserve would announce the details of each operation, and an administrator would enter those details into an automated application that has been 
      largely developed. Using a web-based interface for the new application, depository institutions would submit tenders electronically and get notification of awards.  For auction-rate facilities, in particular, the application also provides the capability of noncompetitive bids, which might appeal to some of the smaller depository institutions. The background work to put a deposit facility into operation is well under way.  The Federal Reserve could announce a deposit facility as early as November and implement the facility before the end of the year.  IAS, the Integrated Accounting System, has been modified to accept settlement entries from the new term deposit 
application. During the next several months, System staff members will complete and test the deposit facility application. Implementing a deposit facility would also require a number of additional steps beyond those already completed, including 
preparing any necessary Federal Register notices, drafting legal agreements, educating DIs about the new facility, obtaining signed versions of the legal 
agreements from DIs that may wish to use the facility, and issuing the electronic 
certificates that DIs would need to access the deposit facility application through the web-based interface. Completing these steps would take several months and entail a 
significant, coordinated effort by System staff members across a number of business lines. Jamie McAndrews will now discuss reserve collateral accounts.   MR. MCANDREWS. Thank you, Seth. I will update the Committee on the possibility of creating reserve collateral accounts as a means to achieve better control of the federal funds rate using interest on reserves.  As you know, the effective federal funds rate has generally been lower than the interest rate paid on excess reserves since October 2008, and the size of this divergence has fluctuated over time. Competition among banks might be expected to narrow that divergence because buying funds and placing them on deposit at their Federal Reserve Bank is both relatively inexpensive and completely risk free.  One explanation for the divergence 
is that imperfections in the fed funds market short-circuit the competitive process by which the fed funds rate would be bid up.  Some banks are paying, for example, 15 basis points to borrow and then earn 25 basis points at the Fed, but other banks are not bidding up the rate to 16 basis points or higher.  Reserve collateral accounts are intended to facilitate competition that would bid up the rate and generate a tighter link between the interest rate paid on excess reserves and the market rate.  Creating this tighter link now would help dispel doubts about the Feds ability to use interest on excess reserves to raise the fed funds rate when the time comes. Why isnt competition bidding up rates more efficiently?  One possible reason is that counterparty credit risk impedes rate-based competition.  Fed funds trades are uncollateralized loans. Consequently, a firm must carefully select its counterparties and limit the amount lent to each of them.  These restrictions limit competition for funds. If a firm could be freed from concern about its counterpartys credit quality, it could search among a wider set of firms for higher bids and for larger trade sizes.  Reserve collateral accounts, or RCAs, would create the possibility of collateralized fed funds trades, which would allow many more banks to bid for funds in the market.   
      How do RCAs facilitate collateralized fed funds trades?  To begin, note that an analysis of data from Fedwire suggests that, in July 2009, approximately half of the daily average of $125 billion of fed funds trades consisted of GSEs lending to banks, with the other half consisting of bank-to-bank trades.  So suppose that two firms, a GSE and a bank, agree to use RCAs to conduct collateralized fed funds trades.  The bank would request that its Federal Reserve Bank create an RCA, separate from the banks master account.  The account would have a unique feature:  The bank could not wire funds out of its own RCA. The funds in the account would, however, earn interest on reserves for the bank paid at the rate on excess reserves.  Under the terms of their collateralized fed funds trade, the GSE would wire funds into the banks RCA, and the next day, the GSE would pull the funds out of the banks RCA back into its own account, using the operational capabilities of the Feds National Settlement Service.  So the account can be thought of as a locked box into which funds are placed and to which the GSE is given the key.  The funds are put into the box by the GSE at night, they earn interest for the bank, and the GSE retrieves the funds the next day. Separately, the GSE and the bank agree on what interest rate the GSE would earn from the deal.   This arrangement would be governed by agreements among the Federal Reserve Bank, the GSE, and the bank, in which the Fed would acknowledge that the GSE has a lien on the funds in the RCA. That acknowledgement would allow the GSE to perfect a security interest in the account.  As a result, if the bank with which it was 
doing the deals failed, the GSE would still get back its principal, as the funds in the account would be collateral for repayment.  With the infrastructure of RCAs in place, we could expect the GSEs and other firms, perhaps including banks, to establish RCAs with banks if they can earn higher rates by doing so.  Parties to RCA agreements would be free to borrow or lend on an uncollateralized basis; this possibility should help in aligning short-term rates through arbitrage activity. Another possible impediment to competition for funds in the current environment might come from banks balance sheet concerns.  Some banks might fear that their buffer of capital to assets above minimum levels is too low for them to bid 
aggressively for funds. Establishing an RCA would be most attractive to those banks with the least balance sheet concerns, because they would be willing to pay the 
highest rates. In this way, RCAs would allow market prices to be determined by the 
banks that are best positioned to purchase funds, which would further reduce the divergence of market rates from the interest rate paid on excess reserves. Our next step would be to approach a number of the GSEs and some banks to gauge their views as to the feasibility of RCAs and their attractiveness.  If a sufficient 
appetite for these arrangements appears to exist, Federal Reserve staff would then 
plan to establish a Systemwide steering group to form a precise timeline for all the implementation steps and to determine if any remaining unforeseen impediments to the creation of RCAs exist. I now turn to Bill Nelson, who will update the Committee 
on issues in the TALF program. 
     MR. NELSON. Thank you, Jamie.  I will briefly review the staffs evaluation of legacy RMBS as potential TALF collateral and then discuss a proposed extension of the facilitys end date. Staff members from the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and New York have worked to understand the potential economic and financial benefits and costs of accepting legacy RMBS as collateral for TALF loans.  The staff limited their investigation to about 16,000 bonds, with a face value of $1.2 trillion, that are still performing, have relatively straightforward structures, and were originally rated triple-A. RMBS are a complex and heterogeneous group of assets.  As a result, its impossible to identify a set of bonds with the lowest credit risk from the larger universe without conducting a bond-level analysis.  In short, there is no equivalent of the legacy super-senior CMBS bonds that are currently TALF eligible.  The prices of the pool of bonds under review have risen from their mid-March nadir, with gains accelerating in recent weeks. The expected return to an investor buying a bond at todays prices is now typically half the return available a few months ago.  Given the recent increase in prices, adding legacy RMBS to the TALF, especially if confined to the safest bonds and paired with large haircuts, might not increase bond prices appreciably. Instead, the facility would act more as a backstop financing vehicle should risk premiums widen dramatically in coming months.  Moreover, because most bonds are expected to take at least some write-downs in coming years, to implement even a limited facility we would have to hire multiple vendors to carefully 
analyze candidate bonds, determine conservative haircuts, and effectively communicate loan terms to potential investors.   Turning to the TALF end date, currently the facility is scheduled to close on December 31, 2009.  The staff is proposing that the Board authorize TALF loans to 
finance new-issue CMBS through June 30, 2010, and authorize all other TALF loans through March 31. We are proposing an extension because at this point ABS and CMBS markets appear to require the TALF to function and because issuers and investors need assurance that the TALF will be available for several months into the future. The ABS and CMBS markets remain impaired and appear likely to remain impaired through the proposed new deadlines.  There is little near-term prospect for a significant revival of non-TALF investor interest in ABS in volume, and the economic recovery remains tentative and potentially contingent on the continued availability of credit for consumers and businesses.  The new-issue CMBS market has been shuttered for over a year, and the only deals on the horizon are relatively small TALF-financed deals. Despite the impairment, the TALF is encouraging the flow of credit to businesses and households.  Staff analysis and a recent survey of issuers indicate that the TALF has contributed to narrower spreads and has played a critical 
role in facilitating new securitizations.   There are benefits to announcing an extension sooner rather than waiting till the end date is closer. Potential issuers of new CMBS report needing six months, on average, to arrange relatively large deals involving multiple borrowers.  
  
 
 Consequently, an issuer that begins the process of putting together a new-issue CMBS deal today risks not completing the deal by the end of 2009, after the current TALF deadline. Similarly, potential investors in the TALF indicate that it takes time to organize investment pools, and the looming deadline is damping interest. While extending the TALF may yield benefits, it may also have costs.  In particular, allowing the program to close might speed the development of alternative 
methods for financing loans to businesses and households, albeit at the expense of near-term disruptions in securitization markets.  A potential cost of extending the deadline for legacy CMBS is that it might reduce the urgency among investors to arrange TALF-financed deals.  If the Board decides to extend the facility in the manner proposed, it could evaluate the need for a further extension later this year or early next year.  At that time, the staff can propose potential adjustments to the program to make TALF financing less attractive, if appropriate.  Conversely, if market conditions improve more quickly and significantly than expected and conditions are no longer unusual and exigent, the facility would be required to be closed at an earlier time. These issues were discussed by the Board at a meeting yesterday.  No decisions were made, but Board members generally expressed support for suspending staff work on legacy RMBS and extending the TALF deadline to the proposed dates.  If these are the Boards conclusions after the discussion today, a press release reporting the new end dates and indicating that further expansion of the TALF appears unlikely at this time could be released later this week.  That concludes our prepared remarks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Just to summarize brieflyfirst, on our exit strategy, we have a belt-and-suspenders approach, a two-pronged approach.  One part is the interest rate on reserves, and the other is management of reserve balances.  What we heard today was, I think, considerable progress on a variety of mechanisms that would allow us to manage reserve balances to help us exit from our accommodative policies going forward.  On the TALF, to reiterate what Bill said, the sense of the Boardand we are interested in FOMC inputwas that we would suspend any further expansion to other asset classes.  We looked at CLOs, RMBS, and CDOs. Is that the right list? MR. NELSON. CLOs, new issue RMBS, and now legacy RMBS. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. So just for clarity, we would announce later this week that we are suspending consideration of additional asset classesnot saying so, or perhaps even saying sobut obviously, if conditions change radically, we could revisit that.  But for now we will suspend that.  In the same press release we would announce the extension of the TALF to March 31 and for new CMBS only to June, because that particular category requires a much longer lead time to put together deals.  So that is what is on the table as far as the Boards discussion is concerned.  Now, let me turn first to Q&A for the staff, and then we will have an opportunity for further discussion as well.  Are there any questions for the staff?  Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I was just curious where the staff came out in rank ordering of these different proposals and whether they were viewed as complements or substitutes?  Should we on embark all three, or should we go forward with one faster than the other?  They were three separate briefings, but I didnt get a sense of how to think of them in total. MR. MADIGAN. I think at this stage we view all of them as potentially productive to work on further. They are at somewhat different stages of development, but I think that they all have significant plausibility as methods of dealing with reserve issues.  I think we wouldnt 
recommend at this stage deciding definitely to use one in favor of another one. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is a little like Bills question, but it is aimed, Jamie, at the RCAs.  Very clever.  I have a number of questions, but I wonder, if we do those other things, whether the RCAs, which strike me as a more radical kind of thing to do, are necessary or even helpful. In talking about the reverse RPs, we said there was concern that doing reverse RPs with Fannie and Freddie might detract from the workings of the fed funds 
 brokered funds market.  Why wouldnt the RCAs have the same negative effect? And if we were doing reverse RPs with Fannie and Freddie, which seems like a more natural extension of what we are doing now, wouldnt the RCAs be redundant with that?  What would they do? Then, sort of more broadly, wouldnt doing this splinter the fed funds market to some extent, detract from  liquidity in the market by breaking it into two piecesa collateralized piece and a noncollateralized piece? And then, why arent RPs a substitute for RCAs?  What do we need those for when we have RPs already for securitized borrowing and lending and presumably putting upward pressure on the funds rate? MR. MCANDREWS. Great list of questions.  With regard to the workings of the fed funds market, I think that, as I mentioned, there is about $125 billion traded per day in the fed funds market.  About half of that is bank to bank, and I dont think we know how disruptive that would be if there were reverse RPs or whether that would continue. I have looked at the distribution of banks balances after you remove the fed funds trades they do per day, and there are still many banks that operate with negative balances per day and, therefore, have to enter the fed funds market. This is obviously a choice that they are making today.  Even with an expanded balance sheet of $1 trillion, lets say, the payments that cross our systems each day amount to about $3 trillion to $4 trillion. So there will still be a need for banks to trade fed funds.  I dont think that that market would necessarily either disappear or be severely adversely affected. Would these be redundant if we used reverse RPs with the GSEs? I think largely they would be redundant, if we use reverse RPs with the GSEs.  However, these would be available to banks as well as to other entities. So as Chris explained, if we just remove the balances from the GSEs, there is still a question of where the funds rate would settle.  I believe that the RCAs, by virtue of their applicability to any participant in the market, would set a harder floor on the fed 
 funds market.  I think the question is whether we think RPs are more operationally complex, more hands-on intervening in the market, versus the RCAs, which might be thought of as allowing the market participants to trade among themselves and find the rate. Then, the question is, Would the market bifurcate into two pieces?  That is a clear possibility. We would have the collateralized market, which would be the floor rate essentially, and the uncollateralized market, which would continue as it is today.  So it would add a new part to the market.  Whether or not that would be seen to be desirable I dont know.  If I may say, as the Chairman was saying that we have a belt-and-suspenders approach, the RCAs are an idea to tighten the belt. [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On a couple of the ideas that are being discussed with respect to excess reserve balances, the GSEseither in Chriss context as potential additional counterparties or in your context, Jamiecould be useful here.  What if the status of the GSEs changed during the period in which we need to conduct these operations? I think in all likelihood the GSEs will be in the same muddled mess they are in now, and the Congress and the Administration will leave them as they are in effective conservatorship forever.  But what happens if in fact that is wrong and the GSEs end up finding themselves either more or less wards of the state with a different mission and capital structure?  Does the prospect of the change in that potentially limit our optionsagain, depending on when this period of draining excess reserves comes into being? MR. MCANDREWS. You are looking at me, but I will turn to Chris as well.  I think that, with regard to the balances of the GSEs, what is important is that all of these payments on 
   mortgages funnel into the GSEs. So my first answer to your question is that I dont think that part would change for the GSEs regardless of their overall regulatory environment. MR. BURKE. I guess a piece of it is going to have to do with their liquidity position.  In talking to them, I think they are feeling that they are being forced to hold more liquidity than they would have chosen to hold on their own. So as their future status changes, if they are required to hold more liquidity, then they might be selling more into these markets, and then these solutions would become more important.  Or if their liquidity requirements were to decrease, then they become a bit less of an issue. MR. CARPENTER. I think one extra point, because you did note accurately the role that the GSEs played in a lot of the discussion, we are still working out precisely whether it is the aggregate quantity of reserves all by itself that matters or if there is an extra effect of the GSEs selling into the market.  Chris noted the quantity of fed funds sales that the GSEs did, and so did Jamie.  Relative to the $750 billion of excess right now, it doesnt seem as though it is that huge a portion. So there is definitely an argument to be made that we might be focusing too much attention on them utterly and completely idiosyncratically when it is a larger issue in terms of just the sheer quantity. I think all of these issues that Chris and Jamie brought up have to be seen through that filter as well. MR. BURKE. Our main tool for measuring the fed funds rate is the fed funds effective, which is looking at just that subset of fed funds transactions that are brokered.  And in that market, the GSEs dominate.  They are 80-plus percent of those transactions.  So when you start talking about doing something to those transactions, that is the backdrop to my statement that, if you remove those, you leave a small and potentially idiosyncratic market from which you are then calculating an effective fed funds rate.  So, to Seths point, a $75 billion program 
 targeted at them is not much with a backdrop of $700 billion or $1.4 trillion in excess, but it may be that their role and where they are trading and the visibility of their trades imply another transmission mechanism affecting just them.  That is one of the things that we are trying to puzzle out.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Given these idiosyncrasies in the federal funds market, even though we might be operating in the overnight market, we may have to consider alternative ways of expressing our policy target.  That should be something we should keep on the table.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is for Chris, and my question is this: Potentially we are going to be doing reverse repos both in large magnitudes and for extended periods of time.  Do you have any concern with having only two clearing banks that are central to that role?  And are there ways that we can either increase the competition or spread out the number of entities that can help with that infrastructure? MR. BURKE. We have been working with our payment systems folks in New York, who have been working on identifying the issues with the triparty platform and working on alternatives to the triparty platform, which is, as you noted, based on those two institutions.  As we know with Bear and Lehman and the outcomes there, there are clearly issues with that system.  So, yes, we are somewhat concerned.  And I think, with the PDCF sunset date coming and the role that it is playing in backstopping triparty, clearly some issues are there.  A number of ideas have floated around. Some are less difficult to implement than others, but we are going to follow along with that work and, I hope, piggyback on that. We have started to think a bit about alternatives.  The scale of our program is such that it is going to carry a lot of weight whatever we do, so we are being quite cautious.  But depending 
    on who our counterparties end up being, it is entirely possible that we could create our own sort of mini triparty with another clearing bank, say a State Street or something along those lines.  There are an awful lot of issues with that.  For that piece of the program, we would end up with a single clearing bank that was working on it. So it is absolutely an issue, it is a concern, and we are concerned about it, but we will continue to follow the progress of other groups. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. If I can just interject very briefly. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chair. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The triparty repo is probably going to be changed very substantially, and so I think that the clearing bank issue will be resolved in the context of that adjustment.  It wont be the separate issue in terms of how we are doing the reserve management.  Triparty repo has to be altered, irrespective of the excess reserves issue. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question about both the TALF piece and the tools.  First of all, I very much support the Boards views to suspend work on RMBS and expanding the range of assets we include in that.  It probably comes as no surprise to most people. I think that is the right thing to do.  The Boards staff actually gave a pretty good, compelling case from my perspective of why that is a risky and maybe not a wise thing to do. With regard to the CMBS extension, I have two questions.  One is that, no matter when we choose to end it, if the view is that there are always six months of planning that go into it, when are we going to decide to actually stop it?  Part of that has to do with the question of what we mean by unusual and exigent circumstances and when that will come into play.  So we wont get four months from June 30 and we wont say, well, we need another six months to keep it going. I think we need to clarify a little for ourselves what the criteria are that were going to 
use to choose to say no more and when were going to stop it.  It also raises the question for me, given the long planning time, about some of the rationale for these programs and the 13(3) lending, in particular. It is unusual and exigent circumstances, but it has been things that had to be done immediately.  Given the long planning periods for CMBS and other types of lending the Congress certainly was willing to do cash for clunkers and supply a lot of money to subsidize the automobile companies and the automobile industry and given the unusual nature of the challenges in the commercial real estate market, oughtnt this be a program for the Treasury rather than a short-term liquidity program for the commercial real estate market?  That is just an open question. How do we determine when the right time is going to be, and when is the six-month lead period going to be enough on the TALF? On the tools, in listening to the discussion, I was struck that for the reverse repos the volumes, at least relative to the size of our balance sheet, are pretty small.  And I, like everybody else, hope that interest on reserves works, that it is enough, and that we do not have to do a lot of this extra stuff.  But we need plans A and B to make sure that we can deliver on the policies that we want. So given the volumes that we would have to do, if the task really came to shrinking the balance sheet in order to be able to do this, are these tools enough to keep the interest rates where we want? I guess that raises the question for me, which is sort of the last stop, about actually selling assets. We did have a discussionI think it was at the last meetingin which we talked about income implications of selling assets and interest rates.  It seems to me, when we talk about reviewing these tools and mechanisms for hitting our targets in managing reserves, that understanding both the consequences and the mechanisms by which we would actually sell assets if the time came to do so need to be in our hip pocket.  I guess my request is that, in the 
   process of reviewing these reserve management tools, we include the selling-assets piece as a way of better understanding what the consequences might be if the world came to thats what we had to do. Thats all. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Buying and selling we know how to do.  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER. Buying and selling we know how to do. MR. BURKE. Should I comment on the scale question? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. BURKE. There are clearly scale issues.  The entire size of the triparty repo market for collateral eligible for open market operations is not much more than $1 trillion.  So clearly, if we get into a market and start trying to double its size, there are going to be issues.  We are starting work now on how these tools might fit together.  One assumption may be that reverse repos would be one of a set of tools that we would use to achieve our objective.  As you note, it doesnt seem likely that wed be able to find a market to successfully reverse out $1.4 trillion in assets. MR. PLOSSER. On a continuing basis. 
MR. BURKE. On a continuing basis.  Notwithstanding that, we will have over $2 trillion on our own balance sheet. But an interesting side effect of our doing this amount of repo is that we know the repo and the fed funds rates are very interconnected and that pressures in one flow over into the other. So the transmission mechanism may actually be that, as we do these reverse 
repos and we drive up GC rates, that the increase in GC rates flows through and starts affecting other rates. So it may be with this tool that you do not necessarily need to drain all of the excess out of the system before you start affecting short-term rates in general.  That is another aspect of this that we will be working on. 
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you. MR. NELSON. With respect to the TALF, the criterion that we applied in thinking about the problem was that it should be appropriate for emergency lending to take place throughout the future period that the staff recommends that the facility stay open.  So in particular for CMBS, we thought that there was a reasonably high likelihood that the situation would remain unusual and exigent through June 30, 2010. In addition, we required that it would be helpful to be open.  Also, even if these criteria were met, if you could wait to announce, then it would be desirable to delay because your perspective on whether it is going to be unusual and exigent in the future will become more accurate as time passes.  But as I explained, there is a benefit to announcing now so that people can begin at this time to arrange these deals.  That said, as I noted, if the situation is not unusual and exigent at any point between now and then, it would still be necessary to close the facility down at that time regardless of the deadline. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A quick question.  Brian, in your charts it says that the TALF is projected to go to $155 billion by the end of next year.  Does that include this extension?  Thats a projection with whatever we are expecting would come from this? MR. SACK. Yes. When we did the balance sheet projections, we assumed the extensions that Bill talked about. MR. EVANS. Okay. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to clarify your statement in terms of the Boards decision suspending consideration of additional asset classes, I want to follow up on a 
   point you just made, Bill.  We are talking only in terms of high-grade CMBS, is that correct?  We are not going to extend that category to lower-grade CMBS? MR. NELSON. That is right. There is no expectation that there will be a change in the types of CMBS that we would lend against. MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thanks. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. About scale, I was wondering, the thought that occurs to me is that surely it is sort of endogenous. It is a matter of price.  If we pay them enough, they will increase their capacity. I mean, is that reasonable intuition? MR. BURKE. I think it is a reasonable intuition. The discussions with the dealers suggest that there is a limit to the size of their balance sheet regardless of price.  That will be something to test, I suspect.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A vertical supply curve. MR. LACKER. And just a question for Jamie McAndrews.  Chris Burke said that 80 percent of the funds market is GSEs to banks? MR. MCANDREWS. Brokered. MR. LACKER. Brokered, right. That suggests that typically GSEs lend to a lot of banks. How many typical counterparties does a GSE have in the fed funds lending market? How small are the numbers?  How limited is competition? MR. MCANDREWS. I dont have the figures in front of me.  It is in the dozens, and they lend very similar amounts.  We have looked at some of the activity.  It is very regular activity. They dont seem to lend to that many for a period of time.  They apparently have lines of credit with several, but they choose to lend fairly repeatedly to individual participants. 
 MR. LACKER. So you are essentially claiming there is an oligopsony consisting of dozens of U.S. banks. MR. MCANDREWS.  I am saying that we are far from perfect competition.  That is a market with search frictions and dominated by counterparty credit risk.  And it is likely that these impede pure rate-based competition that we would see if we alleviated the need to engage in counterparty credit riska screening. They could widen the net of potential counterparties to hundreds and thousands if they were alleviated from counterparty credit risk if these collateralized fed funds trades were available to them.  The issue is, How can we get competition so that in the interest rate on reserves that the Fed is paying to banks is a floor for society more generally? MR. CARPENTER. Just to reduce the incredulity a bit about the market power, one of the main factors of the non-collateralized market is that risk mitigants include just line limits.  All of the market participants know that the GSEs have limits on their counterparties, and they also know that on many days, if you were to add up the line limits across all their counterparties, that would be less than the aggregate amount they are going to want to sell into the market.  In that sense, each individual counterparty has a line limit.  They know that the GSEs are going to use up their line limits, and that is where the market power comes in because the aggregate amount that they would like to sell is greater than the sum of the individual line limits to counterparties. And the dozens is closer to two dozen, not three, four, or five dozen.   MR. MCANDREWS. What Seth is explaining is very similar to the California energy market, where only one among dozens of generators would have to go out of service in order for maximum capacity to be used for all other generators. 
 MR. LACKER. I guess the deeper question I have about this isagain, it seems clever, to echo Governor Kohnthat it seems like a lot of work for a few basis points.  We have lived for years tightly targeting the fed funds rate but tolerating the RP rate 10 or 15 basis points on either side of the fed funds rate. And we have never had a solid conviction that it was one and not the other that was relevant for the constellation of rates.  Or even look at, I dont know, one-month T-bill rates, right? So tolerating 15 basis points seems in the grand scheme of things to be something we are willing to do. MR. MADIGAN. A question, President Lacker, is whether it would persist at just 15 basis points, 10 basis points, or so as the level of rates goes up.  And we just dont know that. MR. LACKER. That is a serious question. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I have a question about the brokered fed funds market versus the other. It seems as though we are a bit captured by the brokered fed funds market because that is where we have the rate information.  But couldnt we actually get the rate information on the bank-to-bank funds market if we really made an effort and because we regulate these entities?  [Laughter]  And if that were the case, we might not want to have the brokered funds market be the dominant element driving our decisions.  It is just an observation question. MR. MCANDREWS. We gathered that information today with error, and I think we can improve it if we work with the banks.  It is with some delay, so the brokers are real time, which is a benefit. 
  MR. BURKE. But in principle you could establish a collection scheme by which you get directly from the banks at the close of business each day the average rate and volume of business that they have done and then aggregate it and get a more complete picture of fed funds rates.   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Then you dont have to worry about the GSEs contaminating your observations of the brokered funds market.  You know, a lot of this is an effort to take the GSEs and the fact that they are contaminating that market.  There might be an easier way to ignore that market and go to the broader market. MR. BURKE. Until very recently, all of our evidence suggested that the brokered fed funds market was just a good and representative subset of the overall market.  Clearly, we are under the impression that that has changed. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, not so much anymore.  MR. BURKE. Right. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Once again, there is a lot of benefit to trying to figure out what is the right target and what is the most meaningful target for policy.  Are there more questions or comments on this range of issues that anyone would like to bring up?  We will of 
course have two more go-rounds.  If not, we have a vote to ratify domestic open market operations. MR. KOHN. So move. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. Okay. Why dont we take a coffee break?  We have coffee available.  Return at 4:15.  Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why dont we recommence and turn to the economic situation.  Presentation is by Larry Slifman and Nathan Sheets.  Larry. 
    MR. SLIFMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If I may paraphrase Garrison Keillor, its been a relatively quiet few weeks for macro forecasters.  For the most part, the high-frequency data on activity that we have received since the June FOMC meeting have come in either in line with our expectations or a bit better, and the numbers continue to remain consistent with the hypothesis that economic activity is stabilizing. At the same time, as Brian has already described, financial conditions have continued to improve. Before I discuss some of the details of the forecast, let me briefly cover two other matters:  last Fridays labor market report and the comprehensive revision to the national income and product accounts.  First, regarding the labor market, the BLS reported that private nonfarm payroll employment fell 254,000 in July, and the declines in May and June are now estimated to have been a little smaller than previously thought. The net result is that the level of private employment in July was about 85,000 higher than we were expecting when we published the Greenbook.  In addition, the unemployment rate ticked down to 9.4 percentwe had been expecting a small increase.  Although we would not be inclined to make any changes to our 
GDP projection as a result of this more favorable labor market news, it does help reinforce our view that a gradual turnaround in economic activity will begin in the second half of the year. As regards the NIPA revision, I would emphasize two elements.  First, as you know, real GDP was revised down considerably in 2008 and the first quarter of 2009.  This downward revision reduced some of the tension between our estimates of the 
output gap and the unemployment rate gap but did not eliminate it.  During the next 
several weeks, we plan to reassess all of our supply-side estimates, but at this point we dont anticipate any major changes.  The second important element of the NIPA revision was a sequence of sizable downward revisions to real disposable personal income beginning in early 2007.  The cumulative effect of the revisions was to put DPI on a significantly weaker trajectory through the middle of 2009, which was an important ingredient in our thinking about the outlook for consumer spending. One other data revision, which we learned with the release of the June figures for personal income and outlays, was a downward revision to personal consumption expenditures in the first half of 2009. Prior to the revision, it appeared that consumer spending was edging higher during the first half of the year.  However, the new data, instead, now show consumption to have been drifting down over much of the period.  Nevertheless, we still expect a gradual turnaround in consumer spending in the second half of the yearbased in part on a further boost from fiscal stimulus as well as less-pronounced employment declines and improving financial conditions.   Outside the consumer sector, the latest readings on housing starts and orders for capital goods point to a lessening in the declines for residential construction and equipment spending.  Moreover, with final demand stabilizing and inventory 
positions considerably improved from earlier in the year, we think that over the next 
several months firms will slowly begin to move production back up toward the level 
     of sales. Indeed, a number of indicators of near-term movements in factory output such as weekly steel production, durable goods orders, and various business surveyssuggest that such an adjustment may already be in process. For next year, we continue to expect the growth rate of real GDP to pick up.  Importantly, continued financial healing, supported by accommodative monetary policy, sets the stage for further improvements in household and business sentiment and an acceleration in final demand.  All told, real GDP is projected to rise about 3 percent over the four quarters of 2010, close to the projection in the June Greenbook. Nevertheless, the rate of increase in GDP next yearwhile still faster than the rise in potentialis relatively tepid for an economic recovery, only enough to reduce the unemployment rate to 9 percent.   Our forecast reflects a balancing of a number of forces.  A negative factor was the lower trajectory for disposable income that I previously mentioned; given the typical lags between income and spending, this acts as a drag on consumption in coming quarters. On the plus side of the ledger, as Brian noted earlier, equity prices are up appreciably since the last Greenbook, whereas corporate bond yields and spreads are down. In addition, as Nathan will discuss, the foreign exchange value of the dollar is down, and the forecast for foreign growth is stronger. As for the components of real GDP next year, the basic stories havent changed in any important ways.  In the household sector, we expect consumer spending to strengthen and the saving rate to drift down a bit as prospects for jobs and incomes brighten, negative wealth effects wane, and the availability of consumer credit improves.  Meanwhile, housing demand and construction, which appear to have reached their bottoms this summer, are expected to strengthen as income picks up and low mortgage rates and lower real estate prices enhance affordability.  In the business sector, we think that the usual accelerator mechanism should spur outlays for equipment and software, augmented by some easing of financial constraints and by 
some extra demand as a result of replacement spending that had been deferred during 
the recession. In contrast, business outlays for structures such as office and commercial buildings are expected to continue to contract throughout 2010 in the presence of extremely tight credit conditions and falling property values. Turning to the outlook for inflation, the NIPA revision incorporated new information on nonmarket prices, which now show a sharp deceleration in the first half of the year. But we dont take any signal from this; and when all is said and done, it looks as though the underlying pace of core inflation has been running a little higher than we had anticipated. In addition, survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations have remained relatively stable.  In contrast, the incoming data on hourly compensation have decelerated sharply this year.  The employment cost index increased at an annual rate of only  percent in the first half of 2009, whereas the Labor Department reported this morning that the productivity and cost measure of hourly compensation declined at a rate of about 1 percent.  These low readings suggest that economic slack already is weighing heavily on labor costs.  We continue 
      to expect that the low level of resource utilization will hold down price inflation as well over the projection period, with core PCE prices rising about 1 percent this year and 1 percent next year. In the Greenbook, we highlighted several risks to our output and inflation forecasts. On the downside for output, we noted the possibility that the improvement in financial conditions observed since the spring could prove to be short-lived and the financial system could suffer a relapse rather than recuperate.  We also highlighted the possibility that, in the wake of the financial and economic turmoil of the past two years, households could raise by a significant amount their desired saving relative to the baseline.  According to the policy rule we use, either outcome would noticeably delay the eventual liftoff of the funds rate from the zero lower bound.  That said, we also recognize the possibility that financial healing could occur more rapidly than we anticipate. Such a development would lead to a more robust recovery of economic activity and less unemployment.  Under those circumstances, the federal funds rate lifts off from zero a year earlier than in the baseline. The funds rate also would be expected to lift off sooner under our assumed policy rule if the inflation outlook were to take a decisive turn upward.  This might occur, for example, if the publics concerns about the expansion of our balance sheet were to manifest themselves in an appreciable increase in inflation expectations.  We examined this possibility in an alternative Greenbook scenario in which we assumed that long-run inflation expectations rise about 1 percentage point over the next several months. In that scenario, core PCE inflation climbs steadily over the projection period, reaching 2 percent by 2013. That development in turn brings forward the liftoff in the federal funds rate by three quarters. So, what does this all mean?  Well, while its been a quiet few weeks for macro forecasters, the risks to the economic outlook are still all above average.  Nathan will now continue our presentation. MR. SHEETS. Since the June FOMC meeting, some encouraging signs have emerged in the foreign economies.  We now estimate that average growth abroad 
edged positive last quarter, and we expect that it will rise to above 2 percent in the second half of this year and to 3 percent next year.  Relative to our June forecast, these projections are up 1 percentage point in the second half of the year and  percentage point in 2010.  Given the remarkable depth of the recent downturn, we 
continue to characterize the projected recovery as sluggish but not quite as sluggish as we previously envisioned. We also note that progress has been uneven across the regions of the global economy.  Asia has seen a blockbuster rebound, while in many 
advanced economies and Latin America the declines in activity have continued, although at a much reduced pace.   In emerging Asia, Chinese GDP soared at an estimated 18 percent annual rate in the second quarter, driven by fiscal stimulus measures and accelerated bank lending.  Strikingly, the increase in bank credit over the first six months of the year was equal 
     to 25 percent of Chinas annual GDP. These hefty stimulus measures successfully lifted domestic demand, with both investment and consumption moving up sharply.  Chinese imports have also risen significantly of late, creating positive spillovers for other countries in the region. Boosted by Chinese demand but also by their own stimulative macro policies, domestic demand in several emerging Asian economies 
has revived of late, including in Korea, where second-quarter GDP moved up at a 10 percent pace.  All told, we judge that emerging-Asia GDP expanded at a 
12 percent annual rate in the second quarter.  Going forward, we expect economic growth in the region to moderate to around 6 percent through the second half of this year and in 2010. However, there are risks to this outlook.  The apparent intention of the Chinese authorities is to leave stimulative policies largely in place until external demand recovers.  The problem is that the available policy tools are mainly 
administrative in nature and difficult to calibrate.  If the present stimulus is removed too abruptly, we could see a hard landing in the region.  And if the stimulus is left in place too long, the result could be an upsurge of bad loans, other financial imbalances, or overheating economies.  How this will all play out strikes us as very 
much an open issue. Demand from emerging Asia appears to have resuscitated the Japanese economy.  A rebound in exports and production fueled an estimated 4 percent rise in Japanese GDP during the second quarter, following two double-digit quarterly declines.  Going forward, continued demand from emerging Asia and the gradual strengthening of 
global activity more generally should allow the export-dependent Japanese economy to grow at a rate of 2 to 3 percent through the forecast period. For the advanced foreign economies other than Japan, the pace of decline in the second quarter appears to have let up some, but GDP by our reckoning still fell at an annual rate of nearly 3 percent. Here too, however, recent signs have been hopeful:  Exports have halted their downward slide; confidence and activity surveys have rebounded; and equity prices have continued to move up.  Given these developments, along with ongoing policy stimulus, we see growth in these economies edging back 
into positive territory in the second half of this year and to 2 percent in 2010.  This gradual recovery is likely to be constrained by persisting financial headwinds particularly related to the still-fragile condition of major financial institutions in many of these countriesand by further deterioration in labor market conditions.  The possibility that these factors may be more adverse than we now expect represents a notable downside risk to the outlook.  The spot price of WTI oil is currently around $70 per barrel, essentially unchanged from the time of your last meeting.  Although the stronger-than-expected rebound in emerging Asia likely points to a firmer path of oil demand going forward, oil inventory levels have increased further in recent weeks, and oil production in Russia and several OPEC countries appears to be edging up.   Concerns about the extent and timing of recovery have remained the primary focus of policymakers in the foreign economies.  Since your last meeting, major 
       foreign central banks have largely extended their policy measures.  The European Central Bank in late June auctioned a mammoth 442 billion of one-year term funding at its main refinancing rate, pushing overnight market interest rates down to about 35 basis points.  Additional one-year auctions are scheduled for September and December, but the ECB has indicated that these auctions may be at an interest rate above the main refinancing rate.  In July, the Bank of Canada reiterated its conditional commitment to keep its policy rate at 25 basis points until the end of the second quarter of 2010. Finally, the Bank of England surprised markets last week when it announced that it was expanding the size of its asset-purchase facility by 50 billion. The BOE plans to acquire the additional securities over the next three months, which suggests a slowing in the pace of its monthly purchases from about 
25 billion to 17 billion. We see major central banks leaving policy rates at their current low levels through the end of next year.  Given the gradual projected pace of 
recovery in these countries and our expectation that headline CPI inflation will remain muted, foreign central banks are likely to have ample room for maneuver in unwinding policy stimulus. The somewhat better global outlook and a resulting increase in investor risk appetite have led to a further 1 percent decline in the dollar, as Brian Sack has indicated. Notably, the dollar is now near the center of its trading range over the past 18 months, down about 10 percent since its peak in early March but also up nearly 10 percent from the lows recorded during the first half of last year.  Going forward, we project that the dollar will remain on a modest downward trajectory, depreciating at an annual rate of about 2 percent, reflecting ongoing financing pressures associated with the current account deficit. Consistent with news around the globe, we are also seeing signs that U.S. trade may be bottoming out.  Although real exports on average appear to have declined further in the second quarter, recent monthly data are now pointing to a rebound.  In line with these signals, we expect exports to bounce back at a 7 percent pace in the second half of the year and to expand 5 percent in 2010.  Prompted by the weaker dollar and the upward revision to foreign activity, we have marked up export growth 4 percentage points in the second half of this year and 1 percentage points next year. Similarly, we see imports expanding at a pace of roughly 7 percent in the second half (boosted in part by a recovery in automotive imports) and nearly 5 percent next year (supported by the recovery in U.S. demand).  Taken together, net exports are expected to subtract about 0.1 percentage point from U.S. GDP growth on average over the forecast period, somewhat less negative than in our June forecast. The following point bears emphasis, however.  Both imports and exports fell sharply during the recent recession.  The level of real imports in the second quarter is estimated to be 20 percent below the previous peak, and the level of real exports is down 15 percent. While our forecast does incorporate some additional cyclical 
rebound, over and above what our models would suggest, there is a risk that imports, exports, or both could bounce back much more vigorously than we have written down, with potentially sizable implications for the contribution from net exports to 
 U.S. GDP growth. That concludes our presentation, and we are happy to take your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for our colleagues?  President Lockhart.  MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A question for Nathan. You know, the Chinese economy is increasingly a central focus as we evaluate the global economy.  And you referenced the bank lending in the last quarter, which appeared to be directed lending, top down, telling them to lend.  Some years ago there was continuing concern about the banking system in China being insolvent. They seem to have muddled through that, but do we know anything about the potential of a banking crisis in China that could have been exacerbated by this directed lending? MR. SHEETS. My sense is that there are some significant risks to the banking system associated with this extraordinarily rapid rise in bank credit that we have seen over the last six months. Now, a good chunk of that lending was associated with the fiscal stimulus program, and so in some sense it is at least being implicitly guaranteed by the government.  Another piece of it seems to be related to lending to regional and provincial governments.  So, again, there is something of a public guarantee.  But I think, even over and above what we can link even loosely to the fiscal stimulus, there was a substantial quantity of lending that happened.  I personally find 
it difficult to believe that that much credit could be allocated as quickly as we saw in the first half of the year and for it all to be perfectly efficiently allocated.  So my instinct here is that at some point we will see some bad loans emerge.  I think that is a risk.  I think there is also ample room to question how effective and efficient the Chinese banks are.  On the other hand, you have the Chinese government, which has ample resources.  So my sense is that, yes, at some point down the road we are going to see some financial aftermath of what has happened over the last 
 six months.  But my sense is also that the Chinese authorities have resources to be able to recapitalize and address and resolve these problems in their banking sector without its necessarily being a first-order issue for the Chinese economy or more broadly for the global economy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern. MR. STERN. Yes, thank you. Larry, I was struck by the decline in the productivity and cost measure of compensation in the first half.  Is there something special going on there? Or 
should we conclude that compensation is less sticky than we might have earlier thought? If so, what are the implications, if any, for employment going forward? MR. SLIFMAN. We dont know for sure, but our speculation is that some of this had to do with bonus paymentsthat there are just a lot fewer bonus payments being made now than had been made in 2008, 2007, and so on.  So we think that that might have been part of what is going on; that is, taking the bonuses out lowers the level of compensation.  But the broader point is that we think that labor market slack is having an effect on wage determination; probably there is less nominal wage stickiness in the economy than there was 20 or 30 years ago.  And as I said, with the unemployment rate up in the 9 percent range, that is putting a lot of downward pressure on wage determination. MR. STERN. There certainly have been a lot of anecdotes about voluntary cuts in wages and salaries to preserve employment. MR. SLIFMAN. Absolutely. So while we have not built in further outright declines in hourly compensation in the forecast, we do have very slow rates of increase in hourly compensation in the forecast. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
 MR. BULLARD. Larry, a year ago or more, we talked some about regime-switching models, where when we entered recession some of the relationships are different, coefficients are different, and so on. Now it appears that we might be exiting the recession.  Would we switch back to some sort of more normal times model, or is this all by the bye here? MR. SLIFMAN. In a mechanical sense, the way we have implemented this in the forecast for much of 200809 is to take what our models would want to forecast and then put in negative add factors to take account of the financial turmoil as well as a regime switching that you would get in a normal recession. In 2010, we are not getting rid of them, but we are diminishing the size of those negative add factors as we think the financial system recuperates and as we move out of recession and into a recovery period.  But that said, it is important to keep in mind that this recovery is still quite tepid by historical standards.  Typically, the economy goes back to its previous peak level of real GDP in two to three quarters.  In our projection, it takes seven quarters for that to occur; so these things are still, in our view, weighing heavily on the economy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to ask a question of Nathan.  At our last meeting and in previous meetings in talking about China, the issue was whether or not 
they might be able to convert their economy to be more domestic demand driven.  Clearly, the stimulus package, in addition to leaking into the securities markets and all of the corruption that has ensued, has affected infrastructure, and that is where I think you see some of this boom coming in the rest of Asia.  For what it is worth, my Chinese contacts and the ones in Singapore suggest that there still is a long-term dependency on U.S. and European demand, to the point that they assert that this boom or boomlet might go on for another two years or so.  But unless we 
 pick up demand and unless Europe picks up demand, it is unlikely to continue.  I wonder if that is an assessment that you might share. MR. SHEETS. I think it is very much the intention of the Chinese authorities to continue these policies until they see the pickup in external demand.  Governor Tarullo used the analogy at the last meeting of the Chinese being in a holding pattern, waiting for the global economy to pick up, and I think that is exactly the right analogy.  I guess what I am wondering and what I am questioning is whether they can calibrate this stimulus, particularly the awesome monetary stimulus, in such a way that they are able to build a bridge from where they are to the time when global demand picks up and whether there might not be some significant imbalances that manifest themselves between now and that point in time. One way to articulate this concern very concretely is that I very much doubt that six months ago the Chinese authorities came to the conclusion that in the second quarter of the year they wanted to put in stimulus such that the economy would expand at an 18 percent annual rate. The fact that they got this outcome really emphasizes the blunt nature of the policy tools they have. If they overshoot in the second quarter, I see that there is a risk they may further overshoot on the upside or significantly undershoot on the downside. So I just dont fully see what the exit strategy is.  Earlier this decade, people were very concerned about a hard landing in China, and they were able to thread the needle.  Maybe they will be able to do that again.  In fact, for what it is worth, that is what our forecast has written down as a baseline against which to talk about these risks.  So there is a chance that they will be able to grow at 9 percent on average for the next six quarters or the next couple of years.  But I for one am very concerned.  I see this rebound in China as really being the key driver of a lot of what we have seen in the global economy, certainly in emerging Asia and Japan and even echoes 
  of it in certain places in Europe, such as Germany, where exports are picking up.  So if the pace of Chinese recovery steps down, we are looking at a much softer global outlook than we are with a stronger China or a Chinese growth path similar to what we have in the forecast. MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree with the idea that they are looking to Europe and the United States.  But in the latest strategic and economic dialogue that we had with the Chinese Governor Warsh was there as wellI heard much more seriousness about a longer-term transition to a more domestically driven economy.  What time frame that has and how that bears on the current situation is a different question, and I heard much more talk about that and a much more detailed discussion of that. MR. SHEETS. Consistent with that, to their credit, through this period of softness and external demand, instead of trying to depreciate the exchange rate, they have depended on domestic demand and fiscal stimulus, and they are trying to do it themselves.  So I would say that is a step in the right direction.  But then the question is, How committed are they, and at what pace are they willing to pursue the deeper structural reforms that are going to be necessary to support private spending and private consumption in China, such as developing financial markets and social safety nets and that sort of thing? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  Seeing none, we are ready for our economic go-round.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data have been encouraging though a bit bumpy.  On balance, although the developments over the past several weeks left my medium-term outlook essentially unchanged, they did give me more confidence.  In my view, 
this reduced uncertainty strengthens the case for a wait-and-see approach to policy.  The reports 
 from my directors and business contacts support the improving tenor of recent data releases.  Business activity is plausibly stabilizing, albeit at very low levels; and in some sectors where the contractions have been on a horrific scale, we have even seen a bit of a bounceback.   Most of these turnaround cases are in auto-related manufacturing.  Arcelor-Mittal Steel is following through on my earlier report of increasing its online capacity this summer.  This reflects both an auto-related rebound in production and the completion of an inventory-adjustment cycle at steel service centers.  Accordingly, steel prices have moved up off very low levels. And a large-scale manufacturer of relatively small auto parts said that his order flow has picked up and that the new rate is consistent with the higher level of production currently scheduled by the OEMs (original equipment manufacturers) for the third quarter.  I spoke with Ford about the effect of the cash-for-clunkers program.  They had an interesting story about which future sales were being stolen by the program.  A substantial segment of the clunker trade-ins have been well-maintained SUVs that are about ten years old and whose owners have good FICO scores, above 650. This leads Ford to think that, without the program, these people would have driven their clunkers for another couple of years.  So perhaps we are stealing sales from 2010 or beyond, not just the fourth quarter. But GM suggested that the payback would be sooner. Also, any uncertain extensions of this program could freeze potential buyers, and so they seem to indicate that it was very important to have a certain date to this program to fix everybodys attention. Nevertheless, both Ford and GM suggested that there would be a small upward adjustment to their current third-quarter plans and then further output increases in the fourth, and apparently Chrysler news reports are similar to this. Moving to broader economy-wide conditions, labor markets seem to be stabilizing.  Obviously, last months pause in the unemployment rates inevitable continued rise is a welcome 
     sign that moderating forces may be gaining some traction.  But labor markets are still weak, and the predominant view among my business contacts is that companies current plans are to strongly resist rehiring many of their laid-off workers when demand eventually does pick up.  They would see anything more than minimal rehiring as undoing the difficult and productive labor cost-cutting that they had done during the recession.  Now, there are reasons to be skeptical of this talk. They probably say it in every cycle, and they have been very aggressive in cutting employment this time.  Still, it does suggest that the unemployment rate could remain stubbornly high well into the recovery stage of this cycle. With regard to financial conditions, our market contacts say that the extreme tail risks have dissipated and that this is reflected in more-normal spreads and lending relationships.  The Chicago Mercantile Exchange reported that market depth in euro, dollar, and Treasury futures has returned to pre-Lehman levels.  I did hear that the legacy CMBS TALF has contributed to a dramatic improvement in liquidity in commercial real estate credit markets.  Still, the fundamentals underlying commercial real estate markets are poor.  A number of my contacts think that many properties are overvalued and that prices are headed for a further fall. Summing up all of the developments, our near-term outlook for growth is a little more optimistic than the Greenbooks, but our projections for next year are about the same.  As I noted 
earlier, my uncertainty over the economic outlook is a bit less than it was at our last meeting. I cant say the same about my uncertainty over the inflation forecast, and this is perhaps the most difficult and confusing period we can imagine.  Clearly, resource gaps will be an important factor restraining inflation over the immediate projection period and beyond.  I hear this rationale for disinflationary pressures from many of my business contacts, particularly with regard to respective labor costs.  But many of these very same contacts, and much of the more 
 general public, can easily visualize potential inflation pressures coming from the enormous current growth in narrow money and huge future fiscal deficits.  And measures of inflation expectations have not moved down appreciably with the greater awareness of this coming resource slack. So that is a little surprising to me.  Our task as prudent central bankers is to assure them that we will do what it takes to achieve our price stability goals.  And yes, everybody is doing that. But I think we are unlikely to see much relief from this educational 
burden for some time to come.  We are going to need to talk about this a lot more before we actually change monetary policy appreciably, I would guess. Despite the risks on both sides, I continue to have a middle ground inflation forecast.  By middle ground I mean that I see an uncomfortable balance between these disinflationary forces from large resource slack and inflation expectations that give notable weight to the large growth in our balance sheet and concerns that we may be reluctant to make a timely exit from our programs.  This leaves me with a forecast that calls for core PCE inflation to remain near its current 1 percent pace over the next couple of years.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, if I may, before I make my comment, I do want to thank Gary for his service. I have a friend who turned 107 and who died the other day.  When he turned 100, [laughter]he ran Kidder Peabody in 1931being a great stock picker, he said it would split two for one. Gary, even if you split two for one, you would still have the shortest interventions of anybody at this table and probably the pithiest.  You will be seriously missed. I would like to start out by talking a little about what we see in the data, and then I would like to provide a summary of what I gleaned from my corporate contacts.  Then given the 
taxonomy that Mr. Wessel has imposed on this table, I am going to conclude with a comment about balls. First, on the data in terms of our District, we are seeing significantly better signs about stabilization. Our initial claims for unemployment insurance are declining.  Our housing industry, which wasnt suffering as much as others, has experienced an uplift.  Our single-family permits were up 13 percent year over year in June; existing home sales were up 3 percent.  And other than President Pianaltos District, we had the best CaseShiller performance, I think from a slightly higher base, in the recent numbers that were reported.  As the leading exporting state, we are taking some succor in the data that are coming out.  Our exporting activity is getting less bad, but it is still not positive.  And from our own calculation of leading indicators at the Dallas Fed, we have seen three months of increase after nine months of decrease.  So from the narrow perspective of our District, we are encouraged to see some stabilization.   I think the national picture has been well covered by the presentations that were made, with one exception. We dont quite share your relative pessimism about the bounceback in economic growth.  We can expect, over the next few quarters perhaps, a little more aggressive activity.  It is really when we deemphasize the negatives and accentuate the positives, as I like to say, and get a boost from inventory investment and government purchase.  Nonetheless, both of those will be assuredly temporary.  It is what happens after that that we are concerned about.  So I would say from the standpoint of my District and from what we are seeing in the data nationally, if you will forgive a bad joke, it is a slightly brighter shade of beigenot tremendously exciting but nonetheless improved from what we saw before. In terms of CEO contactsand the Chairman has my listjust to comment, Brian, on your presentation, particularly your slide number 2 with regard to corporate earnings.  By my 
calculations, so far 443 of the S&P 500 have reported.  Of the 419 nonfinancials that reported, revenuesI am not talking about earnings but revenuesare down 19.1 percent versus 4.6 percent for the 24 financials that have reported.  This is the third double-digit quarterly decline in sales, and the previous quarter was the second back to back that we have seen since 1965. It seems to me, if I were to summarize the one theme I am hearing from my CEO contacts, that it would be that there is too much of everything relative to demand for the foreseeable future. There are too many ships at sea.  And speaking of the Chinese, as you know they are becoming a building power.  I talked about this many, many months, if not a couple of years ago, at this table. They expect, according to some shippers I talked to, to deliver up to 40 percent of the existing global fleet in 2010, 2011, and 2012. There are too many railroad cars.  There are 507 miles, Mr. Chairman, of unused mothballed railroad cars now in the United States, 5,280 feet in a mile, and each car is 90 feet long. I will let you do the math.  But the point is we are not going to build a railroad car in this country for years. There are too many airplanes; there are too many homes; there are too many hotels, too many office buildings, and too many retail stores and malls.  There are 145,000 convenience stores in this country, and the operators of those companies all expect to rationalize significantly. There is too much oil. And to give you a number that comes from Rex Tillerson, the CEO of Exxon, there are 120 million barrels of floating inventory.  That is the highest he can recall in his experience. There are 3 trillion square feet of natural gas on the ground.  We have not before, to anybodys knowledge that I have been able to find out, had this high an inventory count this early in the year. And the resource wells and these narrow wellsthat is, like the Barnett Shalehave to be counted as reserves as well. 
   There is too much corn. There is even too much polyester.  [Laughter]  As Governor Tarullo points outand he and I watch the same television shows; we were raised on Saturday Night Livethere has always been too much polyester.  But the Chinese are now bidding down their prices 5 to 6 percent for the fashion year that starts at the end of this year. So capacity is vast. Cap-ex will remain subdued.  As to head countand the point that President Evans was making earlier about employmentmany, many business people I talk with report that they have cut to the bone. But they also report that, not surprisingly, their workforce is much more productive than it was before, perhaps driven by fear of losing their jobs and benefits. They realize that, at least for the immediate term, these business operators can drive their businesses with fewer workers than they had assumed.  So most remain in a defensive crouch. Most are focused on cost containment.  They are driving their margins, but they are struggling to grow their top line. I would just conclude with my earlier reference to balls:  We seem to have to stay on the balls of our feet becauseI am sure you are relieved about that reference[laughter] as I believe you said earlier, Larry, the risks, like the children of Lake Wobegon, are all above average here.  We are eliminating the negative.  We are accentuating the positive of inventory replacement, a slight pickup here and there.  But it is pretty clear to me, if you will again forgive 
a terrible pun, that business operators in this country are suffering from post-traumatic slack syndrome.  They see it in the abundance of supply. They see it in labor. Their plans to step up to the plate in terms of cap-ex and head count are, it appears to me, constantly being postponed, and therein lies the difficult issue of how we are going to deal with unemployment.  So that is my report, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Fisher.  Governor Tarullo. 
  MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Having exhausted my limited stock of witticisms about coming last in line before the Chairman, I asked Debbie to move me up.  [Laughter] But I also wanted to come a little earlier because, even in the five months since my first FOMC meeting, a lot has changed.  At that time, we were contemplating essentially two scenarios, very bad and even worse. In no small part because of the various actions of the Federal Reserve, the financial system and the economy have largely stabilized, albeit at historically lower levels than we would certainly like to see. It seems very likely now there will be positive, perhaps quite positive, growth in the second half of this year. As for 2010, more upside risk has crept into many peoples forecasts.  So in thinking about our policies going forward, we may be at a point at which it is useful to consider alternative outcomes in a roughly probabilistic fashion and to test how readily we can craft the narrative that leads to each outcome.  It would be a bit quixotic of me to undertake this task for all seven of the Greenbook scenarios to which Larry alluded earlier, so let me distill the manifold possibilities to just three.  One, grind it outa gradual, somewhat halting recovery that leads to 2010 growth somewhere in the vicinity of trend but below what one might expect in a rebound from a severe slump.  Two, relapsea significant stumble for the recovery next year, with GDP growth again dropping significantly below trend.  And, three, rejuvenationa much more robust recovery, with GDP growth significantly exceeding trend, not quite a V-shape perhaps but a reasonably steep slope on the way up. So just to put my cards on the table, I would assign roughly even odds to the first possible outcome, the grind-out scenario.  Not coincidentally, I regard the Greenbook extended baseline to be consistent with this outcome.  Although I am somewhat less optimistic about next year than the staff is, I note that their forecast for the second half of this year is pretty conservative.  So if 
   one averages out their forecast over six quarters, it yields something akin to the first outcome.  Of the remaining two, I see a somewhat greater chance of relapse than of rejuvenation, though I should say that I now regard the odds of the two alternative outcomes as considerably less skewed than I thought as recently as the June meeting.  So clearly I find the story of measured recovery the easiest to tell, in part because the very factors that augur well for the remainder of 2009 may not have sufficient staying power to maintain a healthy pace of recovery through all of next year. The salutary effects of the fiscal stimulus package will start tapering off in the first part of next year. The undoubted need for firms to replenish their inventories will lead to sustained production increases only if consumption increases can themselves be generated and maintained.  The case for a steady increase in personal consumption expenditures is certainly plausible, but it 
is hardly compelling. According to the reported employment cost index, private wages and salaries have been decelerating. With large and still growing slack in labor markets, there is good reason to believe that personal income will continue to suffer from rising unemployment and suppressed wage gains. Moreover, there remains, as Larry mentioned, the important question of what saving rate we will see once incomes do begin to rise again.  The Greenbook makes a reasonable case based on past experience for a 4 percent rate, but the present crisis may contain the seeds of a behavioral shift among some classes of consumers that could move the rate up a percentage point or more. It appears that even the new normalcy in credit availability, both retail and wholesale, may be some way off.  The progress in the corporate bond markets, and to a lesser degree short-term funding markets and plain vanilla securitization markets, has not extended to credit markets more generally. In particular, the rate of decline in bank lending has been accelerating during the 
   spring and summer.  There will doubtless be multiple revisions to the July figures, but the preliminary estimate of a whopping 18 percent decline spread across all forms of lending is a sobering reminder of the difficulties ahead.  While a considerable part of this drop is surely attributable to the decline in demand and cautiousness in underwriting that are typical of recessions, it seems likely that there are also structural factors in both bank lending and credit markets, such as capital impairment and business model challenges, that will weigh on credit markets for some time. I can certainly tell the other two storiesthough with less conviction and, in the interest of time, more briefly.  A relapse could occur if privately generated demand cannot adequately fill in behind the waning effect of fiscal stimulus, given such factors as the expected persistently high levels of unemployment; the potential for more-rapid efforts to repair personal, corporate, and financial balance sheets; and the severe retrenchment of sub-federal government spending that is coming in the next two budget cycles.  If commercial real estate markets turn out to be even moderately worse than currently expectedbad enoughloan losses at many regional and 
community banks could become truly debilitating.   Rejuvenation might come if both confidence and wealth are significantly boosted by a continuation of the equity market rally and a more rapid recovery of housing markets.  The latter of course would also prompt a greater rebound in construction.  Along with the effects of pent-up consumer demand for durables and other items, these developments could provide not just a substitute for fiscal stimulus but a boost beyond the temporary effects of cash-for-clunkers, infrastructure investment, and the various income transfer features of the February legislative package. Global economic recovery, particularly in Asia, may proceed more quickly with an attendant boost to U.S. export growth.  While I can sketch out this more optimistic path, each of 
  its elements seems quite a bit less likely than those supporting the more sluggish outcome and modestly less likely than the catalyst for relapse. I will be interested to hear if some of you can tell this last tale more convincingly.  For the present, though, what I think is most important in my little exercise is that the chances of next year being somewhere between tepid and bad appear to me somewhere north of 75 percent in the absence of further monetary or fiscal policy measures.  Where exactly along that spectrum the actual outcome falls will probably not become much clearer for some time.  If this is a reasonable way of looking at things, our best-advised posture for at least a few more, and maybe more than a few more, meetings may be the somewhat unsatisfactory and awkward one of neither lifting another implement out of our toolbox nor closing the box up and declaring the job finished. Mom was right at least sometimes:  Patience really can be a virtue.  [Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data since the last meeting have been broadly consistent with what we expected in our June forecast.  We have received confirmation that the economy has improved significantly from the sharp declines in the first quarter. Economic growth in the second half of 2009 is likely to be positive, albeit too slow to prevent further job losses. Our forecast still expects a weak recovery as the balance sheets of consumers, businesses, and banks slowly improve.  The improvement is, of course, contingent on no significant adverse shocks appearing over the next year.  It also assumes that households and businesses will increase spending, as the stimulus provided by the variety of fiscal and monetary programs subsidesa component of the forecast that remains quite tentative at this point. 
 That the rate of decline in payroll employment in July was much slower than earlier in the year is welcome news.  However, the unemployment rate is quite high and is likely to remain quite elevated for several more years.  With many workers on reduced hours and much of the labor force still concerned about their job prospects, workers are accepting much lower growth in wages and benefits. Models run by economists in my research department that estimate inflation as a markup over labor costs, as well as many specifications of traditional Phillips curves used to forecast inflation, imply outcomes closer to the disinflation scenario in the Greenbook.  Thus, there is a significant downside risk to the baseline forecast to inflation. Significant impediments to the recovery, of which I will highlight just two, also remain.  Until recently, most complaints by businesses in New England regarding credit availability were from customers of large, out-of-region banks that needed TARP capital.  However, there are 
increasing complaints that small and medium-sized banks are now behaving as if they are capital constrained, despite New Englands smaller exposure to the real estate and auto-related problems that plague many other parts of the country.  The problem appears particularly acute for commercial real estate. Part 2 of the Greenbook characterizes commercial real estate as dismal.  Most of my contacts are using much more colorful language.  Problems with commercial real estate look likely to get worse, and many banks loan loss reserves already lag with the growth in nonperforming loans. Tight credit conditions are likely to make it difficult for businesses and households to finance spending critical for the recovery.  A second potential concern is the unintended consequences of some of the remedies to recent problems.  One example is money market mutual funds, which have experienced declines in assets as investors have increased their risk appetite, as Brian highlighted. At the same time, the SEC is considering measures that would 
  reduce the risk of mutual funds, including potentially prohibiting purchases of asset-backed commercial paper and A2/P2 commercial paper and reducing the weighted average maturity of holdings. While reducing the risk of mutual funds is desirable, if poorly implemented it could disrupt asset markets where mutual funds have been key players.  Although I am cautiously 
optimistic that the recovery is beginning, the situation remains quite fragile.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Third Districts economy seems to be bouncing along the bottom.  Signs of stabilization abound, but evidence of robust activity is lacking in any specific sector. Let me hit just a couple of highlights. There has been some improvement in the residential real estate market, and a large national homebuilder told me that the pickup might in fact be understated in the data.  He indicated that very few offers are now being canceled, and he is actually becoming less willing to negotiate on price and in some markets even beginning to raise prices on homes.  This seems to support the national data, which seem to show some firming in house prices nationwide.  Further, he indicated that his firm is beginning to purchase raw land for development.  On the other hand, nonreal estate investment is still declining.  Office vacancy rates continue to increase, and nonresidential construction contracts are few and far between outside of government, education, and health care. A number of leaders in small and medium-sized business have told me that they are willing and able to expand in the near term.  But the Congresss debates about health care, taxes, deficits, and spending give them great pause, and they are indeed inclined to wait until some resolution has occurred in the Congress.  This, in fact, could delay recovery rather than enhance it. 
  Labor markets continue to deteriorate in our District, although the pace of decline has lessened. One encouraging bit of anecdotal evidence comes from the CEO of a very large temporary employment agency, who told me that both requests and placements have risen substantially in the last couple of months.  This seems broadly in line with what seems to be a somewhat less dour employment picture at the national level. Bankers in our District are reporting deteriorating loan quality, and they are watching their commercial real estate portfolios very carefully.  However, a very large national credit card issuer told me last week that new credit card delinquenciesthat is, those showing up in 30-day delinquencieshave fallen for 8 consecutive weeks.  Although there remain many delinquent accounts that are working their way through the system, this is indeed an encouraging piece of news and may suggest that the financial situation of the consumer may be starting to stabilize. Our Business Outlook Survey was a tad weaker in July than Juneand the August numbers are not in yetbut it was not significantly so.  However, the general level of activity and new orders and shipments have all improved substantially since earlier in the year and are 
well above what were previously characterized as recessionary levels.  Manufacturers in our District are not signaling that they plan to increase future hiring or capital expenditures as yet, but they do expect activity to pick up over the next six months.  Indeed, our index for economic activity six months ahead remains at a very high level, consistent with early phases of recovery, given historical statistics. So the Third Districts economy and outlook is largely in line with the national economy.  We are seeing signs that both investment and manufacturing may be stabilizing and, I hope, improving. I believe that we will see a bit more strength in residential investment than is indicated in the Greenbook projection, and I think inventory investment may become a source of short-term 
     strength as firms rebuild inventory from what seem to be very low levels.  Countering that strength is weakness in nonresidential construction and consumption.  Some of the weakness in consumption may wane, though, with the rise in asset prices and abating declines in house prices.  And the credit card data I referred to earlier may be an early precursor of that improvement.  All in all, I believe that the second half of this year looks a little better to me than it did at our last meeting and perhaps a little better than indicated in the Greenbook; and I expect to see approximately trend growth in 2010.  That said, I am cognizant of the economys fragility.  On the inflation front, my view of the underlying inflation pressures, unlike that of some of my colleagues, is less rosy than that of the staff, although let me stress that my near-term outlook for inflation is benign. But the divergence of the way I think about the inflation process and the underlying methodology for forecasting inflation in FRB/US leads me to see stronger inflationary pressures over the next few years than does the Greenbook.  It is interesting that inflation expectations seem well anchored for now, and thats good.  At the same time, both survey and financial market measures of inflation expectations are not particularly well aligned with the current Greenbook inflation forecast. Indeed, one-year-ahead consumer survey measures of inflation expectations have been unusually volatile over the past year, but they have been rising since the beginning of this year and are now at about 3 percent, which is where they were in 2007.  This is more than twice the inflation forecast in the current Greenbook.  Longer-term survey measures have moved very little, and they, too, remain in the 3 percent range.  Longer-term inflation compensation based on TIPS, the staffs over-five-year-forward rates, has actually increased this year.  Now, I agree that we need to be very careful in taking signals from the TIPS measures at this point.  I think expectations of increased liquidity in TIPS markets and other things can certainly affect that 
 market.  But I dont think we should completely ignore them.  Thus, the public and the staff seem somewhat at odds over the likely path of inflation over the next several years, and at this point I am a little closer to the publics view than to the Greenbooks.  I think this disparity is reflected in the markets expected funds rate path, which anticipates a funds rate of almost 3 percent by the end of 2011, compared with the Greenbook baseline scenario, where the rate remains at zero. Now, given my outlook for inflation, my views on appropriate policy conflict with the underlying policy assumptions in the Greenbook as well.  Maintaining a funds rate so close to zero for another two years would, I believe, reignite significant inflation.  Moreover, given the lags between policy actions and the surfacing of inflation, we will have to act well before inflation pressures become evident.  Otherwise, we will be too late, risking both inflation and our credibility. I have several reasons for this less optimistic view on inflation.  As I have discussed at previous meetings, I put a good deal less weight on output gaps as predictors of inflation.  As I continue to analyze this concept in more detailand I really appreciate Michael Kileys excellent presentation at the last meetingI remain convinced that the usefulness of output gaps for policy depends very much on the nature of the shocks affecting the economy.  In the standard New Keynesian model with the traditional time-series measures of potential outputwhether trend or smoothed output measuresthe output gap and inflation are negatively correlated with markup in technology shocks.  But a monetary policy shock or a demand shock generates positive correlations between output gaps and inflation.  Thus, in order for measures of output gaps to give an accurate read on inflation, you need to condition on the underlying disturbances.  
  This explains in part why the empirical relationship between output gaps and inflation are found to be consistently fairly unstable. Without a clear explanation of or a buy-in as to what types of shock the forecasters believe are hitting the economy, I grow increasingly reluctant to rely on inflation forecasts based on output gaps. Indeed, the Board staff has estimated sizable output gaps in Canada and Europe over the past year, and yet we have seen very little decline in core inflation rates in these countries. I am happy that we are not seeing deflation, but I do think this should give us pause and we should be very skeptical of the reliability of output gaps for forecasting inflation.  As always, I continue to study this issue and will continue to do so because I think the issue will 
loom large for us in assessing the point in time at which we must reverse course.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook for the economy has not changed materially since the last meeting.  I think were in the beginning stages of what is likely to be an exceptionally slow recovery. In the period since the last FOMC, we engaged our contacts in the Sixth District and elsewhere around the country on the questions of slack in the economy, inflationary pressures, the inventory situation, and the state of the real estate sector, particularly commercial real estate. In residential real estate, we are seeing more stability in sales and prices in our District, even in the Florida markets.  The exception to this improved picture is the market for condominiums in large urban areas, which remains burdened by oversupply and very slow sales, due in part to very limited credit availability.  The commercial real estate sector is still deteriorating and poses a threat to recovery in its potential drag on the credit system.  Our 
 District contacts reported rising vacancy rates across every significant market and property type, resulting in widespread rent concessions.  Financial contacts opined that so far delinquency, default, and valuation problems have been managed through restructuring but pointed out that much of the refinancing calendar is ahead. The Southeast has a sizable leisure and hospitality industry, which is suffering from a slow tourist season. Even with pervasive rate concessions, hospitality and resort vacancy rates are high. We asked a number of contacts about inventory levels and the direction of inventories.  We got the sense that inventory reduction has a bit further to go before firms align their inventories-to-sales prospects.  Business contacts at all points along the spectrum from materials manufacturing to retail claim that they are still cutting inventories.  Furthermore, based on these conversations, I doubt that inventories will be replenished to pre-recession levels as the economy improves.  This projection of businesses running on leaner inventories on an extended basis contributes to my view that the recovery will be exceptionally weak. In the latest round of calls made in preparation for this meeting, we probed contacts about their perceptions on available production capacity and willingness to rehire in a recovery.  We heard that a large share of what is counted as excess production capacity should not be 
considered standing ready to be brought back into service.  Contacts expressed unwillingness to bring previously idled capacity, including permanent hires, back on line without much stronger buyer commitments and better margins.  This suggests much less disinflation potential in a slow-growth scenario than would otherwise be the case. In this cycle, our financial market contacts exhibited much more confidence and described an unwinding of the flight to quality based on the view that a catastrophic scenario has been avoided. These contacts reported that they believe markets in general have confidence and, 
  more particularly, that the Fed has the tools to engineer an exit strategy as recovery proceeds.  A widely held concern, however, is the timing of exit and the risk of a premature exit.  In preparation for the meeting, we had a long conference call with several representatives of the American Securitization Forum in an attempt to gauge the rebound of the securitization sector and its ability to support consumer activity.  We talked about the TALF earlier today, and they said that the TALF had been successful in bringing back the triple-A segment, but they cited a number of factors that pointed to a protracted period of less securitization.  This adds to my view that consumer spending broadly will be constrained over at least the medium term.  I think its plausible that a major shift in household spending appetite is under way.  But even if no structural change in consumer behavior is building, consumer credit markets seem to be weighed down by a still-compromised securitization process and constraints on credit card terms and issuance. My view of the outlook is less optimistic than the Greenbooks baseline scenario.  There are elements of the Greenbooks higher saving rate and labor market damage scenarios in my current thinking about recovery. I see an economy burdened by voluntarily restrained and 
credit-constrained consumer spending, a still-challenged financial industry that will be slow to expand credit, weak re-employment prospects, and what we believe is lower growth potential during a period of necessary structural adjustments.  In light of this expected sluggish pace of recovery, I see the risks to economic growth as still weighted to the downside.   My view of inflation risks is roughly balanced.  I do not get a sense that inflationary pressures are on the rise, and I dont see any indication that businesses and households are acting on inflation concerns in any way that would suggest that inflation expectations are currently on the rise. That said, in almost every venue I am hearing strong concerns that inflationary 
 pressures will develop in the intermediate term as the economy recovers.  And to anticipate the policy discussion just a bit, I dont think these concerns warrant an immediate policy response, but they do tell me that our messaging is dealing with challenging crosscurrents and is particularly crucial at this time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Winston Churchill once remarked that nothing in life is so exhilarating as to be shot at without result. [Laughter] Well, exhilaration may be an exaggeration, but I am at least hugely relieved that our financial system appears to have survived a near-death experience. And I am optimistic that you will not be the Chairman who presided over the second Great Depression.  [Laughter] Most, though not all, of the recent economic data suggest that the economy is bottoming out and the worst is over.  Although the labor market is still struggling, auto sales have rebounded in part because of government rebates, and the bleeding has subsided in the housing market.  My directors and advisory council members take the view that the economy looks to have survived a very sharp drop.  It is now starting to brush itself off and climb out of the deep hole that its in. I expect that the current quarter will mark the end of the recession.  Looking ahead, however, I foresee a slow recovery over the next several years with stubbornly high unemployment and very low price inflation, not the sharp rebound that typically follows deep recessions. In particular, I dont think that we can look to consumer spending as a strong engine of recovery. In addition to factors such as continuing job losses, heightened job insecurity, tight credit conditions, and the need to rebuild lost wealth and deleverage household balance sheets, all of which are weighing on consumption, I have been struck by the recent very weak labor income growth, driven in part by stagnating nominal wages.  Wages have posted some of the 
  smallest gains ever recorded.  Furthermore, my contacts report widespread reductions in pension contributions, medical coverage, and other benefits. It seems equally unlikely that investment spending will propel a robust recovery with an overhang of excess capacity serving as a headwind.  President Fisher provided some lovely examples of that.  This excess capacity, or gap effect, is evident in the housing market, where a sizable inventory of unsold homes is holding down new residential investment.  It is also likely to stifle capital spending in manufacturing, where utilization stands at its lowest level of the past 60 years. Even after adjusting for factories that will never reopen, this huge overhang of 
industrial capacity sets a high hurdle rate for new business equipment outlays. I share the Greenbooks pessimism about nonresidential construction.  My contacts uniformly expect commercial real estate conditions to deteriorate further, with rising foreclosures as loans come due that cannot be supported by falling rents and lower appraisals.  Moreover, the shortage of credit to this sector may cause property prices to decline quite dramatically. State and local budgets are another factor likely to depress growth in overall final demand.  California is the poster child in this regard, but most states face entrenched, structural, fiscal problems.  Despite all the press coverage, these problems actually have been tempered recently by the federal fiscal stimulus and by drawdowns from states rainy day funds.  Going forward, the pain may worsen with further revenue shortfalls and spending cutbacks acting as a drag on the whole economy. Although I do not anticipate a strong recovery, I now see the risks around my modal forecast for a gradual recovery to be more balanced than before.  My greatest worry on the downside relates to commercial real estate and the potential for deteriorating conditions to cause many community and midsized banks to fail.  But with the improvement that we have seen in 
 broader financial conditions, there is now some appreciable upside risk as well.  Even if we are lucky enough to get sustained, robust GDP growth of, say, 4 to 5 percent for the next two years, we are still likely to fall short of our full employment goal, given the size of the output gap and the pace at which potential output appears to be growing.  Like President Evanss contacts, my directors report they are intensely focused on cost-cutting measures, and recent readings on productivity and earnings suggest that these efforts are paying off.  With such healthy productivity growth, were likely to see yet another jobless recovery. Turning to inflation, I have two separate concerns.  On the one hand, I am worried about the increasing degree of public alarm regarding the longer-term inflation outlook, and at the same time I am worried that the intense downward wage pressure reported by my contacts could result in disinflation over the next few years that is more severe than in the Greenbook forecast.  Both of these separate concerns are apparent among forecasters participating in the survey of professional forecasters. Over the past six to nine months, the lowest quartile of forecasters has become increasingly concerned with disinflation over the next five years.  In contrast, the top quartile of forecasters has become increasingly concerned with rising inflation five to ten years out. These shifts in the distribution of forecasts suggest a very different skew to the inflation risks we face over the next five years versus the longer horizon.   The fear of higher long-term inflation reflects to a large degree a loss of confidence that the Federal Reserve will be able to attain price stability in the face of unsustainable federal budget deficits. This fear is real, growing, and disruptive.  To assuage this concern, it is important for us to emphasize and defend our independence, to express confidence in our ability to tighten monetary conditions when the right time comes, and to stress our determination to maintain price stability.  
   These inflation fears notwithstanding, the main threat to the attainment of our price stability goal over the next several years stems from the disinflationary forces that have been unleashed by the enormous slack in the economy.  The 1980s provides a useful historical comparison along several dimensions.  Remember that during the 1980s fears about burgeoning federal deficits in an unsustainable fiscal situation were widespread, as they are today. Moreover, the Federal Reserve was under significant political pressure, and there were concerns about its independence.  Even so, with unemployment hitting 10.8 percent in 1982 and plummeting oil prices, core PCE inflation fell about 6 percentage points during the first half of the 1980s. Inflation expectations appear to be more firmly anchored now than in the 1980s, and I expect that to help avoid a calamitous disinflation.  But I am mindful there is a lot we dont know about how these expectations affect actual inflation and how to measure the expectations that are relevant for price setting.  It is sobering to recall that, from 1981 to 1986, professional forecasters consistently overestimated year-ahead inflation, but these expectations did not stop inflation from falling quite rapidly.  So while I would not quibble with the Greenbook projection of only 1 percentage point or so of disinflation, I think we should remain attentive to downside risks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with some comments about the District economy, where the anecdotes have been distinctly a mixed bag recently.  On the 
positive side, clearly, there has been some acceleration in hiring in parts of the service sector.  Auto sales are improving at least for the time being.  Volumes in the housing market in terms of sales of both new and existing homes have picked up, and there are certainly anecdotes of the positive effects from the fiscal stimulus program regarding some infrastructure projects and so 
 forth. On the negative side, things related to transportation, whether it is trucking or volumes from the ports and so on and so forth, are weak.  Residential and commercial construction remains weak, and tourism activity and most other measures of discretionary consumer spending are pretty soft as well. As far as the national economy is concerned, I do think that the contraction in activity has ended and expansion has resumed.  If we think about the circumstances today relative to four or five months ago, the bulk of the surprises both here and abroad have been on the positive side in terms of economic performance, and I would include in that the corporate earnings reports that we have been getting. Now, there may be some noise in all of this, of course, but I think it has been going on long enough and looks broad enough that there is a real signal here.  Also, financial conditions have distinctly improved in both equity and credit markets and certainly more broadly than I would have earlier expected.  So that is all to the good.  And I do think that the latest information on compensation, where it appears that it is less sticky than we might have earlier expected, may augur well for employment at least going forward.  All of those are on the positive side.  My trajectory for real economic growth for the balance of this year and next year is for a bit more rapid growthand it has been for some timethan in the Greenbook.  I would not make any changes to it at this point, but if I were going to, I would probably mark it up a little further given the way things have developed. Let me just make a comment or two about the dual mandate at this point.  As everybody is well aware, we have had a very significant shock or a series of financial shocks, and in the wake of that, it seems to me that we ought not expect to achieve the dual mandate very quickly.  Now, as far as inflation is concerned, if you take the Greenbook forecast seriouslyand I do 
and you look at core inflation, we are not very far off from it, at least not unless you are really 
  wedded to 2 percent as the precise target. But as far as employment is concerned, we are a good deal further away, and of course, if you look at the experience of the economy coming out of the recessions of 90, 91, and 2001, even though I would argue that a fair amount of stimulus was applied during and following those recessions, it took quite some time for employment to pick up in a sustained way and for the unemployment rate to begin to decline in a sustained way.  What I conclude from that, and what I think we ought to be prepared for this time around as well, is that recessions are partly about, maybe largely about, resource reallocation, and it simply takes time for that to occur.  There is only so much that traditional stimulative policies can do to hasten those kinds of adjustments, and if that is a reasonably accurate assessment of the situation, it is simply going to take time for us to resume the achievement of the dual mandate.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy remains weak. The latest reading on Eighth District unemployment, 9.3 percent, is about the same as the national average, but this does mask a considerable variation within the District.  Arkansas, for instance, has an unemployment rate of 7.1 percent, whereas Kentucky and Tennessee are at 11 percent. This variation has actually increased the spread between those numbers, which has about doubled in the last year. Like others here, the reports from my contacts are mixed.  There are reports of continuing job cuts from contacts in the automotive, transportation, electrical equipment, and aerospace industriesBoeing has a big presence in St. Louis.  But firms in steel, fabricated metal, furniture, and plastic products reported plans to actually hire additional workers.  I would interpret mixed signals like this as typical of a business-cycle trough, and I am hopeful that this 
  is what we are experiencing. I think the story from the Eighth District is very consistent with the narrative for the national economy. On the national outlook, I am encouraged by signs of improvement, especially that the financial market turmoil continues to abate by many measures, but I think we still have some way to go on that dimension.  And while the financial sector continues to repair, we are still vulnerable to further shocks, and so we have to remain vigilant.  My sense is that we have established the credibility of government guarantees in many areas since late last year, and that the credibility of government guarantees has largely controlled what Governor Warsh and many others have called the Panic of 2008.  I think we may be at the end of that phase right about now.  Control of the panic is not the same as actually having a healthy and efficient financial intermediation sector.  The next phase will be to emphasize efficiency and health in the financial intermediation industry.  My sense is that getting that right will have important consequences for U.S. economic growth in the medium term.  In particular, the Japanese have been widely criticized for not finding the right policies during this phase, contributing to their lost decade outcome. I thought that during the intermeeting period our discussion and communication of exit strategy, mainly by Chairman Bernanke but also by many others around the table, was very useful. Markets seemed to back off the idea that the Fed does not have a plan.  I think we did establish that the Fed certainly has tools and a plan for exit, and I think some medium-term inflation fears receded during the intermeeting period because of that communication.  More maybe much moremay have to be done in this area, though, because the message is quite a complicated one, as I found myself trying to explain to people.  We have complicated 
interactions among our set of liquidity programs, the asset-purchase program, and what to do 
  about interest rates going forward in the longer or medium term.  One lesson from this intermeeting experience is that markets are still pretty focused on interest rates at the end of the day, really overly focused on interest rates, given this Committees apparent plans and given the fact that we have stressed that we intend to keep rates low for an extended period.  I would like to knock markets further off the focus on rates because our plans do not contemplate moving 
back to ordinary interest rate targeting any time soon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with the District.  Like the national economy, we are showing some signs of stabilization.  In our manufacturing surveys 
and with contacts, we have seen modest increases in production and new orders for the past couple of months, driven in part by rising export demand.  In housing, sales and home prices have stabilized, and the inventory of unsold homes is the lowest in some time.  With the collapse of the energy market, we did see some really sharp declines in drilling and production activities, and the declines account for much of the fall in our structure investments during the first two quarters of this year. With the stabilization of that market, that area has also stabilized in our region as oil production or drilling has begun to stabilize and increase slightly. The labor markets, as everyone else has said, tend to lag, and they remain weak.  In the nonresidential real estate markets, the volume of commercial construction activity continues to fall relatively sharply, and the financial difficulties in the industry continue to worsen.  Delinquency rates on construction loans are rising.  CMBS quality is deteriorating, and there is little refinancing available for maturing loans, and that is the case even when the properties are leased. There is just a very significant reluctance to finance right now.  Appraisers are also being quite conservative. If they take a leased property and they look at their 2006 appraisal values, 
  they will discount them 20 percent, the assumption being that the higher cap rates have to be worth less and harder to finance.  For those that are not leased or not occupied, the discounts run from 30 to 60 percent, with the greatest number in the condominium markets.  However, they are working through that. The banks are being conservative right now, and I will come back to that in just a second. In terms of the national outlook, I agree with others who have said that the economy is showing mixed data, and that is usually an indication that we are likely at the bottom of the recession. I expect very modest growth in the second half of this year and then a picking-up of momentum as we get into 2010, as fiscal stimulus engages even more than it has at this point.  Monetary policy remains easy.  Inventory rebuilding begins to occur, and consumer and business 
attitudes hopefully improve, and I think the consumer attitude will.  It has been there in the past, and I think it will be once again. Obviously, the risk to the outlook is in the financial system, which remains weak.  Setting aside the largest institutions, we know that there is some retrenching in regional and community banks, especially in the commercial real estate area.  What we findand I think it is interestingis that the banks with stress in their commercial real estate portfolio usually have stress in the rest of their portfolio as wellC&I loans and so forth.  But in this instance, I think that going forward their effects will not be as negative as we sometimes fear, for a couple of 
reasons. They are in a defensive mode right now.  They are conserving capital. Those that can survive will survive; and as the economy improves, they will be able, and will be interested in beginning, to lend again. For those that will not survive, another fiscal net is there, and that is called the FDIC because many of those regional and community banks will go under purchase and assumption when they fail.  What that does is take the bad assets out, set them aside, and 
recapitalize the bank, which is then actually in a better position to reengage as a financial institution than it otherwise would be. So they are either going to strengthen themselves and come out of this, or they are going to be taken over, which will recapitalize them.  I think that will be a mitigating factor on the drag that these banks will otherwise have. So it is a climb out. It is not an easy climb out, but on the outlook side, I think that it is a pretty positive outlook going forward so long as the economy is basically turning around and improving.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We made a great deal of progress on our agenda, and I understand that there is a 6:00 p.m. reception for the Conference of Presidents.  So if everyone is agreeable, why dont we adjourn and begin tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you very much. [Meeting recessed] 
August 12, 2009Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  Overnight, Brian Madigan polled the members about the issue of adding ARMs to the MBS program, and we did not find a consensus in either direction. We are pretty evenly divided.  So what I propose that we do is to hold this in abeyance until such future date as we decide to make significant changes in the MBS 
program one way or the other.  At that point, if we were to expand it, for example, we might want to reconsider. But if we are winding it down, there would not be much point.  So we wont take any further action on this until such time as we reconsider the MBS program.  Lets continue with our economic go-round.  President Pianalto, you are first up.  MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My contacts are growing more confident that the sharp decline in economic activity is in the process of ending.  Auto producers are benefiting from the very popular cash-for-clunkers program.  The success of this program is now showing up not just in sales but also in plants restarting or increasing production.  Similarly, housing markets in my District appear to be stabilizing, with starts actually heading up.  This, of course, is welcome news to the producers of building materials, who have been waiting a long 
time to see any signs of a recovery in housing. Still, it would be hard to characterize the mood of business executives in my District as good. Resignation is a better summary.  The declines in their activity levels have been so large that the uptick in growth that they are now experiencing is easily being met either by inventories or by only incremental increases in production.  Most of my business contacts anticipate that their surplus capacity will continue for months or even years to come.  They agree with President Fishers view that there is too much of everything relative to demand.   
  The auto industry remains a clear example.  A number of assembly plants in my District are not going to survive the restructuring that has already been announced.  When I consider only the plants in my District that are going to continue to produce after the restructuring is completed, I find that those auto assembly plants produced 2.3 million cars and light trucks in 2007. Toyota and Honda plants account for over half of the total.  Now, to give you an example of how low production has been for the past few months, in June these same plants collectively produced less than 36 percent of their 2007 output.  Honda and Toyota were operating at well less than two-thirds of their 2007 levels, while the Big Three were at roughly 10 percent of their 2007 levels. The cash-for-clunkers program has been viewed as a national success, boosting July 
auto sales by 16 percent above June sales. Nevertheless, while this was a sizable percentage increase at the national level, this represents just a months worth of 2007 production capacity 
for the surviving plants in my District.  This is hardly a dent in the excess capacity available in this entire industry. The problem is not limited to autos.  Primary metal producers, as an example, are operating at less than 50 percent of their capacity.  One community banker in my District who noted improving economic conditions cautioned that every plant in her region is operating on some form of reduced workweek.  In fact, the dominant reaction of business people in my District to date has not been to close plants permanently but rather to hunker down and manage output levels to match current demand by cutting back on labor or other variable inputs.  Workforces have largely accepted a variety of pay and hour cutbacks to make these lower levels 
of output possible. This downward pressure on wages is showing up strongly both in the employment cost index and, as we saw, in yesterdays unit labor cost numbers.  While this pattern might sound as if it is limited just to the Midwest, international producers report similar 
experiences in their locations worldwide.  From the producer standpoint, it is just hard to see an impending acceleration of prices, although the growing stability in output does seem to have been enough to limit further discounting. To gain further insight on the output gap, I met with a group of academic advisers who worked on different models that try various approaches of evaluating the output gap over the business cycle.  They all essentially agreed with my business contacts opinions that it is likely to take a long time before this output gap is absorbed.  Combining their perspective with the information that I gathered from my business contacts, I ended up leaving my output projection largely consistent with my forecast at the last meeting, which has been broadly consistent with 
the Greenbooks viewpoint on output. I expect output to grow slowly in the second half of this year, followed by a return to more-solid growth rates next year. Although I expect inflation to dip in the coming months, my outlook for core inflation calls for a gradual climb back toward 2 percent in the next two or three years.  My inflation outlook runs a little higher than the Greenbook baseline, largely because of differences in our views of where inflation expectations will settle out.  And although the large output gap in my outlook does serve as a disinflationary pressure, the research on this issue leads me to be cautious about how much effect this output gap is going to exert on my inflation projection. So the risks to my outlook remain to the downside for output because the improvements that I have seen, notably in housing and auto sales, have relied on stimulus programs that may be quickly depleted and a still uncertain recovery in consumer spending.  My talks with both researchers and business people leave me with a lot of uncertainty about the inflation trend, and I see those risks remaining symmetric.  So while the news has been encouraging, I think watchful waiting seems like the right course for monetary policy to me.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Manufacturing in the Fifth District appears to be running ahead of the nation, and I guess fairly confidently I can say running ahead of the Fourth Districts. Our survey index moved up again last month and has been in positive territory for three months in a row.  And the new orders component registered a particularly strong increase. Our service sector continues to contract, however, although somewhat less broadly than before. What improvement has taken place has been most notable in nonretail businesses.  Apart from the cash-for-clunkers frenzy at auto dealers, retail firms in our District still report very slow shopper traffic and depressed big ticket sales. Our directors and other contacts continue to describe conditions as gloomya view that seems to be associated with the low level of current activity rather than its rate of change.  I suspect they are less impressed than economists by trends in first differences.  Some of our contacts wonder how long current conditions will last, and one director reported that people are hanging on like Sergeant Snorkel, a character in the Beetle Bailey comic strip who is sometimes seen dangling from a small tree growing out of the side of a cliff.  [Laughter] On the other hand, we have also heard reports of activity picking up here and there around the District.  Both our surveys and our other contacts indicate little or no price pressures at this point.  A couple of our bankers report strong deposit growth.  One cited state and local government shifting funds out of money market mutual funds in order to obtain unlimited federal insurance.  Some of our large banksand I have seen these reports from elsewhere in the countryhave seen a small decline in early-stage credit card delinquencies, thirty days or less, which they believe may be the beginning of a peak in consumer credit losses. 
  But one of our banks has done some really interesting research.  This is a large, formerly monoline credit card bank with a fairly good reputation for quantitative research.  Their staff looked at the 2001 and 2008 stimulus programs.  And there, because the disbursement was 
staggered by the last two digits of your Social Security number, they were able to trace the effect through their customer base.  They estimate an effect between 20 and 50 basis points on their second-quarter early-stage delinquencies from the stimulus payments this year.  This is enough to undo the decline from the first to the second quarter in the early-stage delinquency results that they saw. Now, that said, if you look at their monthly data, even with the adjustment they still show a peak in May rather than in March as in the unadjusted data.  So there is still a glimmer of hope, but it is a fainter glimmer than one would take just from the raw numbers.  I thought that was pretty interesting. Since our last meeting, the national data have come in pretty much as expected or, in some cases, not quite as dismal as expected.  As a result, our projections havent changed appreciably.  It seems pretty clear now that the downturn has ended, and positive economic 
growth is set to resume.  But as I said, I get the sense that economists are taking more comfort in this than anyone else. And it seems as though many people are coping with the depressed level of current activity and uncertainty about the timing and strength of the recovery.  I think that, in turn, is going to depend critically on the path of household spending.  The 2 percent decline in real consumption from the end of 07 through the beginning of this year has been fairly extraordinary. But the fact that consumption has been fairly flat this year I take as encouraging, considering the decline in compensation and the tightening in credit terms over that period.  This 
suggests that consumer spending is likely to expand if labor market conditions stabilize and the 
recent gains in household net worth are sustained.  That expansion is likely to be at a cautious 
  pace, however.  Labor market conditions may stop deteriorating, but they are unlikely to improve dramatically anytime soon, I think.  And any recovery in consumer creditworthiness is likely to depend on improvements in consumer income prospects. For other components of demand, the outlook is more mixed, as some of you have said.  The prospects in nonresidential construction are bleak, given the ongoing rise in vacancy rates.  
But the inventory swing in GDP is going to give us a second-half boost, and the drag from 
residential investment appears to be lessening as housing starts begin to affect the flow of residential construction spending. Inflation has been sort of choppy lately but reasonably well contained.  Core PCE over the last six months averaged 1.8 percent or a few tenths lower if you back out those tobacco tax hikes. One widespread view is that some sort of output gap is going to hold down inflation.  There has been a little commentary on this so far around this table.  This situation bears some resemblance to the beginning of the last recovery in late 2003, when the Greenbook forecast had inflation falling to 1 percent because of the remaining slack in the economy at that time.  Of course, we had that scare in early 2003, when core inflation seemed to fall below 1 percent for a time.  But by the time of the December meeting, inflation was running around 2 percent in the data we had at that meeting.  Moreover, TIPS inflation compensation had risen pretty sharply in the second half of 2003, so inflation expectations and our expectations about the output gap were giving conflicting signals about how inflation was going to evolve.  As it turned out, what we got was a small inflation scare in 2004, not disinflation.  Overall inflation turned out to be 3 percent in 04. Core inflation was 2 percent. And it suggests that, at least in that episode, expectations trumped the gap. 
Reflecting on that episode reinforces my skepticismothers have commented on this about the usefulness of conventional output gaps for forecasting inflation, particularly at the beginning of a recovery.  Now you might argue that the amount of slack in the economy was far less then and it is far larger now.  The unemployment rate then was only about 6 percent.  And that may be true, but then the question that arises is, Why hasnt inflation fallen by more now if the output gap is so much larger?  And a recent San Francisco Fed publication by a couple of its economists made this point pretty firmly.   President Plosser and I discussed output gaps with Mr. Kiley at the June meeting.  That conversation may have seemed a bit confusing.  It was when I read the transcript.  [Laughter] But I think the point to take away from it is that in DSGE models, like the Boards EDO model, and all of the broad class of New Keynesian models that are coherent accounts of how the gap interacts with inflation, the relevant potential or natural output is something that varies a lot with supply and demand shocks.  This is the point that President Plosser made yesterday.  Now, you can always step outside one of those models and calculate some smoothed output trend from the data, and you can call that potential, but that number has no significance for the behavior of inflation within the model.  I think these models provide a way of understanding how it would be possible for monetary policy to generate an increase in inflation even if output is fairly low relative to some smoothed trend calculated from outside the model.  These issues have important implications for our strategy and our recovery, and that suggests to me that it could be very dangerous to rely on a sense that output and labor markets are not tight enough to trigger an increase in inflation. That completes my remarks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like I think most people around the table, I am pretty confident that real GDP growth will be positive this quarter.  Much of the economic news has been better since the last meeting, with a wide range of indicators suggesting that the recession is either over or will be over very soon.  For the remainder of the year, the economy should be boosted by three factors that a lot of people have cited around the tablerecovery in housing and a significant rise in motor vehicle sales, the effect of the fiscal stimulus program in supporting domestic demand, and a sharp swing in the pace of inventory investment.  In fact, if the inventory swing were concentrated in a particular quarter, we could actually see fairly rapid growth for a brief period.   But I expect that, as in the 200103 period, the recovery will be slower than usual, at least over the next year or two. In particular, I expect that consumption is likely to grow only modestly. First, growth of real disposable income will probably be weak by historical standards.  
As I noted at the last meeting, there are a number of special factors that boosted real disposable income in the first half of the year, helping to offset a sharp drop in hours worked and very sluggish hourly wage gains.  These special factors will be absent during the second half of the year. Second, households are still adjusting to the sharp drop in net worth caused by what will likely be a persistent decline in home prices and last years fall in equity prices.  This suggests to me that the desired saving rate will not decline sharply as the recession comes to an end.  As a consequence, consumer spending is unlikely to rise much faster than income.  In other words, weak income growth will act as an effective constraint on the pace of consumer spending.  Third, the financial system is still in the middle of a prolonged adjustment process.  Banks and other financial institutions are working their way through large credit losses, and the securitization 
 markets are recovering only very slowly.  This means that credit availability will be constrained for some time to come, and this will also serve to limit the pace of the recovery. Despite the big buildup of slack in the economy, the core measures of inflation have been somewhat sticky.  I dont think this will last. Thus, I think the risks on inflation are still likely to be on the downside over the next year or two. There are two reasons why I think core inflation is likely to decline going forward. First, the variables that respond to labor market slack, such as the employment cost index, have already fallen quite sharply.  This suggests that the output gap is exerting downward pressure on labor costs, which is a key component of overall costs in many industries. Second, during the first half of the year, core services inflation has been lower than core goods inflation. I think this is meaningful because core services inflation exhibits much 
more inertia than core goods inflation and because it is unusual for inflation for core services to be running lower than core goods inflation in the first place.  I dont expect that we will see this pattern persist for long, and I suspect that it is more likely that core goods inflation will moderate than that core services inflation will pick up in the near term.  So I would expect the overall core inflation rate to come down.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As others have remarked, the incoming data have confirmed that the forces that have been dragging down the economy are abating, and as a consequence, activity is leveling out. Those forces included consumption, which fell very, very rapidly in the second half of last year and is in the process of leveling out.  Housing demand is picking up a little. Most important, as others have pointed out, the inventories of goods are being brought into better alignment with the lower level of sales.  Declines in inventories should taper off, and that will add to industrial production and damp declines in employment.  In the 
   Greenbook, inventory investment subtracts 1 percentage points from H1 growth and adds 1 percentage points to H2 growth.  So that is a big swing by itself.  And, of course, better economic data are feeding, and feeding off, the better environment in financial markets and the resulting decline in risk perceptions and risk aversion. Beyond the inventory cycle, the fundamental shape of the recovery will be determined by final demand.  The question I asked myself was, Is there any reason to be more optimistic about that now in any fundamental way than the very gradual path most of us had written into our forecasts a month ago?  And I think there are some reasons for greater optimism.  The rebound in asset prices, including equity prices and wealth, has been faster than anticipated, and that will feed consumption and lower the cost of business capital; global economic growth is picking up more than expected; and with the weaker dollar, net exports will be less of a drag.  I think we can have more confidence in a multiplieraccelerator effect from the shift in inventories feeding back on final demand. But I think there are a lot of reasons for caution as well, and my fundamental outlook hasnt changed. Many of my reasons were already given by the Vice Chairman, Governor Tarullo, and others, but let me list them here.  In fact, final demand was weaker in the first half of the year than we had anticipated, especially for consumption, which was held down by the sharp drop in labor compensation.  I think labor compensation is going to be depressed going forward, given the high margin of slack in labor markets and the slow recovery of jobs.  Some of the current signs of stability in demand are being driven by policy-induced borrowing from future consumption. I am thinking of the cash-for-clunkers program and the first-time homebuyer tax credit.  That is all just taking demand from 2010.  The stabilization of consumption spending occurred in the context of a major increment to income from the stimulus 
   program.  So even with all of that extra income, consumption just stabilized.  That doesnt repeat. Fiscal impetus dies out over the next few quarters, removing that source of support for final demand.  The saving rate is not likely to go down from here, as the Vice Chairman remarked, and is more likely to rise than fall.  The staffs roughly 4-percent constant saving rate is consistent with wealth-to-income ratios based on relationships over the past decade, and I think that is the most likely outcome.  But those saving patterns could, partly at least, have reflected the not only rising comfort levels and increased appetite for risk associated with what had been thought of as the Great Moderation but also the innovations in credit markets that 
increased the availability of credit.  I think the risk is that greater uncertainty about jobs and reduced access to credit will spark greater saving out of current income. Despite the improvement in financial markets, credit is definitely tighter for households.  They are facing substantial increases in borrowing rates and reductions in credit lines, especially for credit cards, due to rising loss rates and in anticipation of the effective dates of new laws and regulations. Respondents to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey didnt see this going away anytime in the foreseeable future. More generally, although financial conditions have improved, they are still quite tight in a number of dimensions.  Small businesses have been constrained by the tightening of credit card and HELOC credit. These businesses, in addition, are likely to suffer disproportionately from the failures and churning in banking markets that President Hoenig and others discussed.  There is a lot of asymmetric information in a small business loan.  It is hard to transfer that business from a failing bank to another bank.  The National Federation of Independent Businesss survey suggested that small businesses themselves see great difficulty in getting credit.  It is much tighter, much worse than even the early 90s,when we had the 50-mile-an-hour headwinds.  The 
 banks ability and willingness to take over more credit flow is constrained by their concerns about losses in capital. Credit availability is likely to loosen up gradually for those credits that arent easily channeled through securities markets. And even after the recent gains, there are important asset prices that dont really reflect the policy easing. Bond yields, say for the triple-B corporation, which is approximately the median corporation, are not far from where they were in August 07 or September 08, before the Lehman collapse.  Stock prices are down 30 percent from August 07, despite the recent gains, and 20 percent from just before Lehman fell.  The broad index of the dollar is unchanged relative to August 07, and it is higher relative to September 08.  So I think in the context of a substantial widening in the output gap, you would like to see a marked easing of financial conditions. And although certainly in the short-term markets financial conditions have eased, I think across a broad array of markets they really havent eased very much.  So, on balance, I think this is going to damp the recovery, and I see the very gradual pickup in final demand as the best forecast, implying high and rising margins of underutilized resources.  In that circumstance, it is likely to be consistent with damped inflation for the foreseeable future. I am a little surprised at how damped the decline in inflation and underlying inflation has been, but I also recognize that the relationship between the gap and inflation is not tight.  My sense isand Nathan commented on this, and it was in the Greenbook as wellthat globally inflation hasnt come down that much.  This has been true for inflation-targeting countries and non-inflation-targeting countries.  It has also been true, as near as I can tell, in countries that did a lot of quantitative easing and in countries, like Canada, that didnt do much quantitative easing.  I was looking at the Canadian nominal TIPS spread this morning.  It looks exactly like ours, despite the fact that they dont have the worry about exit strategy that we have.  So I think what 
 we have is very firmly anchored inflation expectations.  We could see that long-term inflation expectations remained anchored in 07 and 08, when headline inflation was high and rising, and they have remained anchored in 09, when headline inflation has fallen to the lowest level in several generations. I think the underlying pressure here is for lower inflation with the weakness in compensation and labor costs, and I interpret that weakness as indicative of the fact that there is an output gap. However large it is, it is substantial enough to put downward pressure on labor costs. And I think it will be very difficult to raise wages or prices by very much in such a competitive environment.  There wont be any pricing power for a number of years under the most likely scenario. Although inflation has been sticky, by most measureseven measures of core inflation it has come down over the past year.  I was looking at the Greenbook table of broad measures of inflation, which look at 2007:Q2 to 2008:Q2 and 2008:Q2 to 2009:Q2.  Every measure, except 
one, in that table is off, and all of the core measures had declined over the past year.  For example, core CPI inflation went from 2 to 1 in the four quarters ending in 2009:Q2.  I think this does reflect weak demand and slack and is a situation in which expectations will remain anchored or could even begin to recede a bit.  The lesson is, when inflation expectations are well anchored, the Phillips curve is flat.  This suggests to me that we could have substantial output growth and a narrowing of the output gap without added inflation pressures.  In fact, in my view, the next move in underlying inflation is more likely to be down than up.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 
MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I did some thinking overnight about the assessment of financial markets that Brian Sack highlighted yesterday, and I realized that 
 markets havent seemed so good or seemed so self-satisfied since, I dont know, the spring of 2007. [Laughter] So I thought we should all take some good caution from that. Let me put an exclamation mark around some of the points that Brian made in describing the remarkable move across equity and credit markets.  First, on the equity market front, more industries, more companies, and more subsectors have participated in this rally and the expectation of recovery. The breadth of this move across assets and across geographies has been far more durable than I would have expected when we last met.  The credit market improvements 
have been even more significant.  We have seen the positive sentiment move down the capital structure. The bank loan syndication market, which had all but disappeared, to where obituaries 
had been written about it, is building remarkably over August.  It wouldnt surprise me at all if, come the postLabor Day rush to the capital markets, we see the bank loan market coming back after the improvements we have seen in the last several months in high yields, convertibles, and 
preferreds, again attesting to remarkable improvements in credit markets.  Now, in some ways these improvements have been made possible by an increase in the emergence of investable assets. So re-risking is the new de-risking.  Re-risking is the new fad in financial markets.  Fund flows, particularly toward riskier assets, are impressive, and I think we have to continue to watch this trend and this development. If I were to assess where we stand here in August against what our expectations of the financial markets could have been over the last few quarters, I cant help but think that we are very much at the high end of what might have been reasonably achievable.  How much credit is owed to the Fed and how much credit is owed to the self-corrective nature of these markets or to some good fortune is hard to judge. 
      Let me turn now to the trends in these financial markets and what they might suggest for the real economy.  Amid this rally, I think it is possible that this breadth of improved market activity ends abruptly. We dont want to suffer from a failure of imagination, and I think we could envision a series of exogenous shocks that bring many of these improvements to end more quickly. My own sense is that the prospects of those shocks are more likely outside the United States, particularly outside the U.S. banking sector, but not impossible here. But given the rally in these asset prices, they seem to be able to cover up for a lot of sins on balance sheets of banks overseas. So I think the prospects that I worried about six weeks agoof a surprise that causes these markets to retreatare lower but still not negligible. Well, it would be nice if these trends were to continue unabated.  But my sense would be that straight-line, undifferentiated moves in financial markets tend not to end well.  What we might be enduring over the next few months might be some period of pause, some period of patience and consolidation that could give this rally some longer legs.  If the next six months look like the last three or four, then it does strike me as possible that there is an upside, not only in financial markets but in the real economy, along the lines of what Governor Tarullo highlighted yesterday. So fundamentally, one central question for us is whether financial market trends persist long enough and strong enough so as to markedly drive sustainable gains in the real economy.  That is, will the wealth effects of improved balance sheets both to consumers and businesses offset the weak outcomes that were highlighted in the Greenbook and by the discussion yesterday? Let me turn now to the real side.  I broadly share the Greenbooks view of the real economy over the next six quarters, though I suspect that we will see pretty significant volatility quarter over quarter in GDP.  But I think the Greenbook strikes it about right.  You take some account of the 
       positive incoming financial market data but recognize that they cannot mask the weak incomes and the slow trajectory for improvement in labor markets.  Weak real disposable incomes coming from weak labor markets and the problems that small businesses will no doubt confront in the next 18 months, as highlighted by Governor Kohn, suggest to me that we run the risk of more-persistent weakness on the income side than the upside improvements in balance sheets and household net worth. So after these six quarters of somewhat bumpy but real improvement, what is next? I suspect that the predominant risk in the medium term is for slower growth and weaker labor markets than we have long grown accustomed to coming out of recoveries.  The headwinds posed by financial markets have probably turned into crosscurrents in figuring the direction of the real economy, making our jobs around this table even more difficult than usual.  Prudence probably requires us to take less signal from the improved financial market conditions and to seek further evidence not only of improved corporate profits but also of revenue growth.  As I think President Fisher said yesterday, the most telling tale for the future, at least of the equity markets and the real economy, will be revenue growth.  Outside of financials, is there top-line growth from the rest of the Fortune 500?  Does that suggest some top-line growth from small businesses that is telling us that the economy is gaining some enduring strength not because of or supported by government programs but because of the improvements on the real side of the economy? In the course of the last 18 months, we have debated first the prospects of recession and now the prospects of recovery.  I think around this table we have struggled with trying to understand what has gone on. During the recession, we first asked ourselves some 18 or 20 months ago what was the breadth of the weak signs that we were seeing.  Then we turned to a discussion of what was the depth of the real recession that we were confronting.  Then late in the cycle, even now, we are 
           talking about what was the length of this recession.  And I suspect that these same wordsbreadth, depth, and lengthend up capturing our discussions in the next 18 months.  What is the breadth of the improvementsthe breadth of the green shootsthat we try to envision as we think of an economy coming out of recession?  What is, in this case, the heightthat is, what can this economy aspire to?  What can it drive? And as questions of double dips happen as some of the fiscal and monetary stimulus and some of the extraordinary actions tend to abate, the question will be, What is the length of this recovery? I think it will make our challenge over the period in front of us as difficult as that over the past 20 months. A couple of final items.  First, on the international front, I was encouraged by Nathans description of the improvements, particularly in the emerging markets.  But I have to admit being less persuaded that there will be a V-shaped recovery, particularly in places outside China.  I am less persuaded that there will be a V-shaped recovery or anything even like a U-shaped recovery in Europe and among many of our trading partners absent a strong U.S. recovery.  Europe is likely to be materially weaker than the United States and emerge later from recession. And a final note on inflation, after having heard a broad discussion around this table. Inflation measures do appear quite satisfactory for now.  The situation certainly bears watching.  My own sense is that, while expectations of inflation remain firmly anchored, the Fed has played in the last several weeks an important role in describing our conviction that we have the tools to exit from the extraordinary practices we put in place and that the Fed will be central to those expectations over the next 20 months, putting further burden on folks around this table.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke. 
    MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to echo and maybe expand upon some of Governor Kohns comments about credit.  First of all, the current situation: In the overall lending environment, demand is extremely low, although bankers are very happy with the quality and the spreads on the new credit that they are originating and they continue to shift resources to work through problem credits. In C&I lending, credit quality is actually holding up better than they expected, but line utilization is at very low rates, in some cases 30 percent, maybe 50 percent on the high side, and again, new demand is weak.  In consumer credit, they did cite early-stage delinquencies as being improved, but nobody seemed particularly comfortable with calling that a trend. In residential real estate, the low-end product is beginning to move.  Sellers are lowering their price expectations, in some cases being forced by the banks that will no longer extend interest carry to get through this, and the buyers seems to be less fearful of further price declines.  Most of the buyers are either first-time homebuyers or investors who now see that the rental cash flow on these makes sense.  The inventory is actually fairly tight in the 3-to-6-months supply for the low end and in the 30-to-40-months supply for the higher, larger properties.  Some of the inventory is just plain bad product.  It is bad construction; it is poor design, poor location, or too big.  The new construction is generally smaller with fewer extras but still with quality finishes because that is what is being demanded at the moment. On the commercial real estate side, they are working down construction loanssome through payout, some through charge-off, some through sales, and much through mini perm financing.  There is very little demand for new CRE (commercial real estate loans)a reminder that commercial real estate loans are still just business loans and their performance is dependent upon the industry and the local economic conditions.  So the deterioration depends on the type of 
  property. Condos are awful. Hospitality properties are extremely weak.  Retail is still suffering from rent renegotiation and vacancy rates, with rural areas and small towns being hit particularly hard by big box closures.  Office and multifamily properties are weak but are still holding up reasonably well. When I look at credit availability, I am struck by the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey results, particularly the part that shows reductions in the number of respondents that have tightened terms while, when weighted by balances outstanding, more than 75 percent of the respondents expect the standards for prime borrowers to remain tighter than normal for the foreseeable future and the fraction for tighter terms for the foreseeable future for subprime is even higher.  In addition to having tighter terms for approval, banks are unlikely to engage in the aggressive acquisition strategies that they hadfrom the credit card mailings, the teaser rates, and that sort of thing because of the inability to reprice post-acquisition.  Those are unlikely to resume, and I did hear reports of 40 percent to completely eliminating those types of promotions. On mortgage and home equity, as the indirect channels have performed so poorly, again, they are unlikely to resume indirect acquisition.  The existing credit card and home equity line availability is still being reduced.  I heard a lot about the credit card regulations, and my sense is that they are going to affect availability, pricing, and terms for maybe a couple of years but ultimately a new equilibrium will be found and a new business model will take hold.  Most actually expect C&I lending to return with improving business performance as banks look for income.  This is the place to which they all seem to be looking for additional income, but this may not translate into improved availability for small businesses.  Charge-offs are running very high on small business credit, and small businesses are, frankly, very thinly capitalized.  Many of them are just giving up, no longer willing to advance the funds to keep the businesses running.  SBA eligibility is a very, very tiny 
       slice of this market.  The majority of these loans are not even in C&I.  Some are in CREif you think about hotels, gas stations, and that sort of thing, where the property is the business.  Some are in consumer, in mortgages, in home equity, and in credit cards. Then I have a hard time even envisioning what the future of mortgage finance is going to look like. The originate-to-distribute model is still broken, and there is no new model in sight.  The future of the GSEs is murky.  The FHA volume is growing amid rumors of credit problems and potential fraud.  The private label is closed and unlikely to return without changes to originator compensation and examination, rating agencies, contracts with servicers, payment priorities, loss distribution and trust agreements, and transparencies of the loans underlying the securitizations.  So it is difficult to determine how dependent even the GSE market is on the Fed purchases. Finally, bankers are making loans regarding credit in light of a number of uncertainties in addition to uncertainties about economic outcomes.  The first one is capital requirements.  Will all banks be stress-tested?  Is that the new norm?  There is limited understanding of what the capital-assessment process is designed to do and what it might mean.  Community banks insist that 12 percent is the new 10 percent in terms of risk-based capital, and many note statements regarding higher capital requirements for systemically important institutions.   In terms of treatment on commercial real estate loans, while all of the anecdotes are certainly not applicable to all banks and may not be applicable even to some banks, all banks believe that they could be true.  They discuss the revival of the performing nonperformer.  I heard reports of the entire construction portfolio being classified.  If a property is not sold through two sales cycles, although nobody seemed to know what that meant, it must be converted to a 10-year amortization. Examiners are requiring new appraisals, and these are being affected by both reduced cash flow and higher cap rates and also by the fact that either there are no comparables or there are 
         distress sales on the comparables.  The CRE loans are creating large classifications due to the reduced cash flows and lower appraisals, even if no loss is ultimately expected, followed by MOUs and C&Ds if the classified loans are over 100 percent of capital, and then a requiremefor-dollar capital for classified assets. Accounting issues are also of concern because they actually affect the measurement of capital. FASB is getting ready to propose fair value accounting for all loans.  Securitizations, participations, and loan sales are moving back on the balance sheet.  We found in the stress test the issues in understanding acquisition accounting and what that means for reserve measures, capital measures, and loan book measures, and then loan loss reserve accounting, consumer protection rules, the credit card rules, the proposed CFPA, the proposal for plain vanilla products, the loss of preemption, and the prospect of a duty of care and fiduciary responsibility.  All of these are weighing on banks as they make their decisions. Given all of these issues, I cannot take my eyes off the alternative scenarios in the Greenbook for financial fragility or higher saving rates and their unwelcome outcomes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, and thank you all.  Let me try to summarize the discussion I heard around the table, and then Ill add a few comments.  There was a substantial consensus that the economy is stabilizing, albeit at a low level, and that the technical recession is ending. Conditions are quite heterogeneous, but that in itself was viewed by some as characteristic of a turning point.  Participants agree that output is likely to grow over the remainder of this year, and the downside economic and financial risks may be moderating somewhat.  Most expect the recovery to continue into 2010, but there were divergent views about the strength of that recovery.  Uncertainties include the strength of the consumer rebound, the extent to which credit conditions are 
       normalized, and the rate of growth of economic potential.  Fiscal stimulus should help to support growth, but state and local governments remain severely constrained.  Slack in resource utilization may cap inflation in the near term, but there is a risk of an increase in inflation expectations associated with aggressive monetary and fiscal initiatives. Now, turning to a bit of detail, consumer spending growth remains weak and discretionary purchases are limited; nevertheless, most saw signs of stabilization in this sector.  Households still face considerable headwinds, including slow growth in labor income, uncertainty about jobs and job security, declines in asset prices, excessive leverage, and tight credit.  An important issue is whether households propensity to save will be permanently altered by the recent experience.  Real income growth is likely to remain weak for the remainder of the year as stimulus payments decline and as labor markets remain slack.  Retail sales are weak, outside of autos where sales have responded to the cash-for-clunkers program and perhaps greater stability in the industry. Households are facing much tougher terms on credit cards, home equity lines, mortgages, and other forms of credit, but stimulus payments may have helped reduce financial stress for some consumers. Home sales, residential construction, and prices have shown signs of stability or even improvement in some areas, especially at the low end.  The more-serious concerns now seem to be in the nonresidential sector, where deteriorating fundamentals, falling prices, and lack of refinancing capacity are weighing down the sector.  Commercial real estate defaults are a significant threat to banks, especially small and medium-sized banks.  Firms are seeing better-than-expected profits, mostly from rigorous cost-cutting, but revenues remain weak.  Inventories are under better control, especially in the auto sector, although there is more to do.  Firms are generally setting a high bar for expansion either through capital investment or hiring as managers see a good deal of excess capacity in the system.  Uncertainty about government policy may also be slowing expansion plans.  
      However, some surveys show some optimism among manufacturers, particularly for the medium term. Manufacturers are benefiting to an extent from a better-than-expected global economy and export demand and perhaps a weaker dollar.  In the service sector, tourism and retail, transportation, and other sectors are weak, but some areas such as health care continue to grow.  Small businesses may suffer disproportionately from the credit environment. In the labor market, employment data continue to be weak, but there is evidence that payrolls are stabilizing or at least falling more slowly.  Staffing is now quite lean, and productivity has risen.  Long-term unemployment and permanent separations remain high, suggesting possible problems of skill loss and a need for labor reallocation that could slow recovery in aggregate output.  There was considerable discussion that reallocation is linked to the NAIRU.  Wage and benefits growth continues to decelerate, reflecting poor labor market conditions. The cumulative improvement in financial markets since the spring is quite significant.  The stock market is up broadly.  Private credit spreads continue to come in.  Money markets are performing better, and risk-taking has increased.  Market participants see the risk of catastrophic outcomes as much reduced.  However, financial concerns remain.  In particular, banks face significant credit losses yet to come, and as I mentioned, small and medium banks are particularly vulnerable to losses in commercial real estate.  Bank lending has fallen dramatically.  Loan officers report tight terms.  Deleveraging is still under way, and securitization markets for their part are not yet taking up the slack. Inflation has been moderate and generally stable recently.  As measured by TIPS breakevens, inflation expectations have risen, especially at the medium-term horizon, though they still may be characterized as anchored.  On the other hand, utilization gaps remain large, and wage growth has slowed markedly.  Overall the risks to inflation seem balanced, with output gaps 
           exercising a deflationary influence and public concerns about the Feds balance sheet, the federal deficit, and monetary and fiscal exit strategies tending to raise inflation expectations.  Communication about the Feds ability and willingness to withdraw accommodation at the appropriate time remains important.  Any comments? Let me add just a few words to that.  Again, Governor Tarullo mentioned that coming last has some difficulties.  I agree, of course, with most of you that the intermeeting news has been quite encouraging.  On the real side, there had not really been much of a markup in the expected path of growth, but we have seen now firm evidence of stabilization, and I think we can agree that the downside risks to the real economy are moderating. In the financial markets, we have been head-faked before.  We need to be careful. Nevertheless, improvements are substantial and do feel more durable.  I think there may be some evidence, in fact, that we are getting into a more beneficial feedback loop, the opposite of the adverse feedback loop that we saw last fall as an improving economy raises stock prices, reduces credit spreads, and improves confidence in the banking system, which in turn helps the economy. I think we will be seeing some growth for the rest of the year.  In fact, I would venture to guess that there may be some upside risk to the Greenbook forecast for H2 growth.  There are a number of forces that I think have baked-in growth for the next couple of quarters.  Let me just give a short list.  First, obviously, is inventory dynamics, notably in autos, which is being helped by the cash-for-clunkers program, but in other sectors as well.  Inventories dont have to increase to improve economic growth; they just have to fall more slowly.  Second, we have seen a rise in new orders in manufacturing and significant increases in global industrial production, which suggest some strength in the manufacturing sector.  Third, there is a good bit of evidence of bottoming-out of residential construction, which will remove a significant drag.  Fourth, fiscal support.  Fifth, the 
         better-than-expected economic growth abroad, which both is directly supportive and suggests that some of the forces at work may be reversing more quickly than expected.  Then, sixth, we shouldnt forget about the normal cyclical patterns, which include a rebound in demandpent-up demand, for durable goods, for housing and other investment goods, and for other things that have been below normal in the last year. So, again, I think the next half year will be reasonably good with positive growth.  Of course, the $64 billion or trillion question is what happens in 2010 going forward.  I guess, as we have discussed around the table, the two key questions will be, first, once the inventory cycle has worked through, is final demand growth going to be sufficient to sustain a near-term recovery; and, second, as evidenced by some of the discussion of the NAIRU, what is really happening to potential, and what constraints will that put on growth? The consumption path is very difficult to forecast.  We are projecting recovery, and we should just keep in mind that so far we really havent seen really strong evidence even on stabilization at this point.  Consumption and disposable income were revised down quite a bit in the NIPA revisions. Consumer confidence ticked down in the latest readings and is still very low in absolute levels, and we have talked about all of the various constraints and drags on consumer spending. And so there certainly is some risk still in that sector.  The question, again, is, Will consumption begin to strengthen next year?  The Greenbook projects both real final demand and real consumption growing at a rate of about 2.6 percent in 2010.  The standard errors for this are very wide, as I will discuss further, but I actually think this is a pretty reasonable guess.  First of all, we have to keep in mind always that what matters for growth is the rate of change and not the level. So even if consumption is weak relative to some benchmarks, so long as there is improvement coming from higher asset prices, some improvement in labor markets, greater confidence, and 
             improving financial conditions, that would support growth in consumption even if the level in some sense is low.  So that is important. A deeper, almost philosophical question is, What is going to happen to saving rates? The Greenbook has households sticking with the household saving rate of about 4 percent that we have seen recently, and that is what the staff projects into the 2010 period.  In this respect, the Greenbook saving rate projection is lower than that of many outside forecasters.  I think the reason that some people think the saving rate is likely to go up comes from staring at a picture that shows the household saving rate over the last 20 years, which shows a steady decline from 8 or 9 percent to close to zero to where we are today, about 4 percent.  I am actually, again, inclined to side with the staff on this.  I think that the household saving rate is a pretty flawed measure of consumer behavior for a number of reasons.  One reason has to do with the artificial distinction between household saving and private savingprivate saving including the saving of businesses. To the extent that households can either see stock prices going up or know what the value of their small business is, they ought to integrate very largely their saving behavior with the business sector.  When I was in graduate school, I learned about Denisons law from 1958, which said that private saving is more stable than its components, sort of a preliminary to Ricardian equivalence in a way, and there is some good evidence for that.  If you look at the private saving rate, it has been much more stable than household saving.  Another indicator that I think is useful, and we discussed in the Board meeting on Monday, is the wealth-to-income ratio, which theory says would be a determinant of saving behavior.  What is important to understand is that wealth-to-income ratio behavior was abnormal in the late 90s and the early part of this decade, when you had first a surge in stock prices and then a surge in house prices, and in neither case was consumption able in some sense to keep up with those increases in wealth.  The longer-term wealth-to-income ratio is about 4.75 rather than the 
          5.5 to 6.0 that we have seen recently, and it happens to be exactly where we are today. So there is less of a sense that we need to have substantial wealth building when you look at those data than when you look at the household saving rate.  Finally, just in terms of looking at the data, despite all the uncertainties and the drags on consumer spending, we really havent seen saving go above 4 percent thus far.  The temporary increase in the second quarter was due largely to the transfer payments. So just to reiterate, I think the Greenbook forecast for saving and final demand in 2010 is reasonable. That said, as I said initially, the standard errors around this are large.  I think we can be confident that, at some point, consumption will begin to grow againwe dont have to worry about secular stagnationbut the exact timing of the consumer recovery and the speed at which it occurs will obviously make a big difference for medium-term cyclical dynamics.  In particular, the Greenbook simulation shows a case in which the saving rate rises sharply.  That causes the economy to be very weak in 2010 and then just to begin to grow again in 2011.  Another possibility is that the saving rate will rise but only very slowly, which would give us slower growth and a longer, more-extended transition period.  So this remains a very important question.  Again, I think the modal forecast of moderate growth next year is a good one, but there is an awful lot of uncertainty about that. On the side of economic potential, we had some very interesting discussion today about output gaps, the NAIRU, and so on, and I think it is an interesting question as to what extent the NAIRU may have risen or may be rising going forward.  There are some arguments for a higher NAIRU.  The level of long-term unemployment now is exceptionally high, and as we have seen in other countries, the loss of skills and loss of job attachment can lead to hysteresis-type effects, which can raise unemployment going forward.  As I had noted myself in the past and others noted 
               today, there is a significant amount of sectoral reallocation going on from certain sectors that were overexpanded to other sectors.  Indeed, as others have noted, a relatively high fraction of layoffs in this episode have been permanent rather than temporary.  In the medium term also, we had very low rates of capital formation.  We have tight credit and other factors that may inhibit job creation and business creation.  So those are some factors that may raise the NAIRU.   My own sense is that the NAIRU may be a bit higher, but I wouldnt go nearly so far as the 6 percent in the labor market damage scenario that the Greenbook looks at.  There are a number of reasons to think, in particular, that the reallocation argument should not be taken too far.  First of all, if you look at the cyclical variation across industries, it is, in fact, relatively normal for a deep recession. The sectors that are suffering the most are sectors like construction, manufacturing, durable goods, wholesale, and transportation.  Those are the sectors that normally are badly hit during a recession, and of course, I would have to say that most of these sectors are now well below what their steady state was likely to be.  Diffusion indexes and cross-sectional standard deviations of growth in employment also dont suggest that we are in an extraordinarily different situation from other recessions. With respect to the permanent layoffs, the real change seems to have happened around 1985.  In the 70s and early 80s, we saw a dominant factor.  The marginal firing in recession in the 70s and early 80s was more likely to be temporary than permanent.  But since about 1990, in the last three recessions, the temporary and permanent shares have been about as constant on the margin as they are on average.  That did not say it very well, but what I am trying to convey is that the role of permanent layoffs is not particularly striking compared with the last two recessions.  It is striking compared with the 60s, 70s, and early 80s.  In fact, there is a good bit of evidence of labor 
      hoarding of different types.  One example I would give is part-time work, which is a way of keeping workers, who can be restored to full-time work when the economy recovers, connected to the firm. Finally, a note on the NIPA revisions:  Prior to the revisions we had the puzzle that unemployment seemed too high given the decline in real output, which suggested that maybe there was a more-strenuous-than-normal effort to get rid of workers and to reduce staffing.  With the NIPA revisions, Okuns law is looking better; again, it looks as though we are fitting a more normal cyclical pattern.  So there is a lot of uncertainty here, and I find it fully plausible that the NAIRU will be a bit higher than it has been in the past.  But in looking at that issue, I dont think we should overstate the differences between this recession and at least the last two recessions. By the way, there was an interesting interrelation between the two issues I talked aboutthe consumer response and the NAIRUwhich was, in fact, captured in the staffs labor market damage scenario.  They assumed in their simulation that consumers understood that the NAIRU was higher and that, therefore, employment, growth, and output will be lower in the future.  That feeds back on their consumption decisions in a permanent income sense, and as a result, the simulation actually showed bigger effects on GDP than it did on inflation, contrary to your simple intuition about what the NAIRU would do.  I think that is an open question.  If the NAIRU is larger and we around this table are not sure, are consumers better able to assess that than we are? That may turn out to be an interesting question as we see what connections there are between the potential of the economy, on the one hand, and consumer behavior, on the other hand. I dont have much to add to what has been said about inflation.  I think we have to wait and see how the gap story works.  I agree with President Plosser that in principle it depends a lot on the source of the gap, although I do think that aggregate demand has been very important in this particular episode.  We did work very hard, all of us, during the intermeeting period to try to 
                                                          2 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). communicate our exit strategy and our resolve to defend price stability.  We  should continue to do that, and I hope that will be constructive going forward.  So those are my comments.  Brian, if you will, we can just turn now to the policy alternative. MR. MADIGAN.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill be referring to the package labeled Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives, which includes the same set of statements that was distributed earlier this week.  Although the economic outlook has changed only gradually on balance, the economic and financial situation has improved significantly since early spring.  The economic downturn has abated considerably, with activity apparently now in the process of leveling off; financial markets display fewer strains and have become much more supportive of growth; and downside risks to the economy seem to have diminished appreciably.  Still, the outlook continues to be weak, with the staff, many private forecasters, and Committee participants projecting a subpar recovery and slow progress in reducing unemployment.  Meanwhile, inflation has been subdued, but not as low as might have 
been expected given the substantial resource slack that has developed.  Moreover, concerns persist about the possible effects of unprecedented monetary and fiscal stimulus on inflation.  Depending on your assessment and weighting of the risks, you might consider a substantial range of policy adjustments to be appropriate. In addition to this broad economic backdrop, the calendar itself may be a factor in the Committees consideration of its options today.  The Treasury purchase program is scheduled to come to an end in September, and the agency and MBS programs are 
due to expire at year-end. Given these impending expirations, the Committee would seem to have reached a key decision point at this meeting.  In particular, an important part of your deliberations today and presumably at your September meeting will be whether to allow the existing programs to expire, to let them reach their existing 
limits, or to extend and expand them.  Against that background, the Bluebook presented four policy alternatives: A, B, C, and a variant of alternative B, labeled B. In addition, on Monday we provided another version of alternative B, labeled alternative B (revised), for your consideration.   The staff forecast and the analytical approaches summarized in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of the Bluebook continue to suggest that a near-zero federal funds rate will remain appropriate for some time.  Consistent with that view, each of the alternatives maintains the existing 0 to  percent target range for the federal funds rate. The alternatives differ primarily in their options for large-scale asset purchases 
and in their guidance about the federal funds rate going forward.   Under alternative A, page 2, the Committee would expand its purchases ofTreasury securities to $450 billion.  The Committee would also indicate its expectation that it will purchase the full $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities while continuing to state that purchases of agency debt will total up to 
     $200 billion, thus implicitly allowing for a likely shortfall in this program.  The time frame for Treasury purchases would be extended by three months to year-end. The Committee might be motivated to adopt alternative A if, like the staff, it continues to expect a comparatively slow economic recovery, with high levels of resource slack persisting for several years and inflation falling to rates below those that Committee participants see as most consistent with the Federal Reserves dual mandate.  Based on our reading of market reactions to previous announcements of changes to LSAP quantities, we estimate that the $150 billion expansion in Treasury purchases would likely reduce longer-term interest rates by 10 to 20 basis points.  In turn, we estimate that a reduction in longer-term rates of this magnitude would lower the unemployment rate two years ahead by 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point.  However, 
these estimates are subject to considerable error, in part because it is difficult to tell whether worries among some market participants about monetization of the debt could be exacerbated by the expansion in Treasury purchases. If members are also concerned that market participants may be pricing in a much earlier shift toward monetary policy tightening than currently seems likely and that these expectations are resulting in financial conditions that are tighter than appropriate, the Committee could consider sending a more explicit signal about its expectations for the path of policy. In particular, as shown at the end of the third paragraph of alternative A, the Committee could indicate that economic conditions are likely to warrant maintaining the 0 to  percent target range for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2010.  This statement would provide a more specific time frame than indicated by the current extended period phrase, and it would also be more explicit about the trajectory of rates than the current exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate. If the Committee broadly concurs with the staff forecast but judges that the costs of expanding LSAPssuch as potential difficulties in tightening policy down the road or possible adverse effects on inflation expectationswould likely exceed the 
benefits, it might opt for one of the versions of alternative B.  Under the Bluebook version of alternative B, page 3, the Committee would essentially maintain the current limits of its large-scale asset purchases.  However, the statement would indicate that the Committee will gradually slow its purchases of Treasuries in order to promote a smooth transition in markets and, to allow time for that transition, will extend the period for completing these purchases through October.   Under alternative B, the Committee would not specify its plans today for exiting from its MBS and agency debt programs.  Although Desk and Board staff members recommend tapering those purchases as they are brought to a close, the MBS and agency debt programs are not scheduled to expire until year-end.  Thus the 
Committee might conclude that it is not yet necessary to spell out its exit strategy for these programs and may see silence on this point as helping to preserve optionality 
over coming weeks to increase these purchases if economic or financial conditions unexpectedly deteriorate. However, the Committee would probably wish to decide 
      and announce no later than its September 22-23 meeting whether and how to wind down its MBS and agency programs.  If it were so inclined, the Committee could announce at its September meeting that it was tapering the current program of MBS and agency purchases into the first quarter of next year.  Such an approach would be consistent with the recommendations in the Desks memo. The language of alternative B would suggest that the Committee was unlikely to resume purchases of Treasury securities absent very unexpected developments.  Should the Committee instead wish to preserve significantly greater scope for restarting Treasury purchases in coming months, it might choose instead to adopt the language of alternative B, page 4. Under this variant, the statement would note explicitly that the Committee is prepared to consider resuming its purchases of Treasury securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  Like B, alternative B would preserve flexibility with respect to possible changes in the agency debt and MBS programs. Alternative B (revised), on page 5, incorporates several changes from the draft of B in the Bluebook. First, to avoid a possible implication that the inventory correction is close to completion, the third sentence has been revised to indicate that businesses are making progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales, rather than have made progress.  Second, on further consideration it seemed appropriate to characterize financial market conditions as having improved further rather than just somewhat further.  Finally, changes to the third paragraph would preserve the option of resuming Treasury purchases but use language that is less explicit than that in B.  In particular, the penultimate sentence would indicate that the Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities generally, not just those of agency debt and MBS.  Overall, alternative B (revised) would maintain significant flexibility for the Committee to change its purchase strategy in either direction. Market participants generally appear to expect an announcement along the lines of the various versions of Alternative B, and any market reaction seems likely to be relatively modest. If anything, market rates might move up a little as investors would be confronted with the reality that the Committees asset purchases were now being wound down. Under alternative C, page 6, the Committee would begin to lower the degree of monetary policy stimulus, partly by reducing its large-scale asset purchases and partly by revising its forward rate guidance. Members might be attracted to this alternative if they were more optimistic than the staff about the likely strength of the recovery or if they were otherwise concerned that inflationary pressures could be greater or build more quickly than expected by the staff. The latter concerns could reflect a view that the influence of slack on price pressures is likely to be smaller than the staff anticipates, perhaps because you judge that financial turmoil is restraining the economys potential by more than allowed for in the Greenbook projection.  Alternatively, you may worry that the high current degree of monetary 
      accommodation, if sustained much longer, could spur inflation through any of a variety of channelsfor example, by leading to an unmooring of inflation expectations. Such concerns might have been amplified, for instance, by the recentnearly  percentage point increase in five-year-forward inflation compensation.  Under alternative C, the Committee would state that in view of the improved economic outlook, it now expects that its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and agency debt will cumulate to about $1 trillion and about 
$150 billion, respectively, somewhat less than the previously announced maximum amounts.  The Committee would also indicate that, with its purchases of Treasuries well along toward completion, it anticipates buying the full amount of $300 billion.  As in the B alternatives, the Treasury purchases would be extended through October, thus encompassing a tapering strategy, and the reduced purchases of agency debt and MBS would permit those transactions to be tapered over the balance of the year.  The announcement would also note that the Committee now expected that it would 
maintain the current 0 to  percent range at least through the end of this year rather than for an extended period, which would likely be seen as a weaker policy commitment. Overall, the combination of reduced asset purchases and a signal that policy tightening might begin soon after the turn of the year would represent a considerable surprise to investors and probably would cause quite a sizable market reaction.  A reduction in total asset purchasesapart perhaps from a small undershoot in the agency debt programis not expected by the market, and thus the announcement of these reductions would likely prompt a noticeable backup in market interest rates perhaps 20 to 25 basis points on MBS rates and 10 to 15 basis points on Treasuries from the supply effects alone.  Those increases would be reinforced by the revision to the Committees forward rate guidance, as that change would probably be seen as a signal that the Committee now anticipates that it might begin tightening policy early next year. Although market participants currently see some chance of such an outcome, most appear to expect policy tightening to commence no sooner than mi2010 and probably later. The decision to combine the revised expectations for the funds rate with the reduced size of asset purchases might be seen as reinforcing the message that the Committee clearly wants to move away from its accommodative policy stance, and hence this announcement would probably lead to a significant 
increase in yields on instruments with terms of six months or more. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions for Brian? Seeing none, we can begin our go-round with President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the policy described in alternative B, much for the reasons laid out in the Bluebook and as Brian just explained in his 
 lead-in. The economic story in my view is unfolding close to my expectations, and negative deviations from this outlook might justify an increment of stimulus as detailed in alternative A, but I dont see such deviations developing quite yet.  At the same time, as noted in the earlier go-round, I view the economy as remaining in a fragile condition, so I think the reduction in stimulus laid out in alternative C is premature.  I support the language in alternative B (revised).  I think it best serves us in remaining flexible and keeping our options open. And I dont favor the language prepared to consider in alternative B. In our deliberations, we translated this subtly suggestive language into Southern.  In Southern it would come out fixin to ponder. [Laughter] If you detect a little sarcasm in that, that was my view of the prepared to consider language.  I do support the extension of TALF. I favor this.  As I mentioned in my economic go-round discussion, we had a long conversation with the American Securitization Forum, and the take-away from that conversation convinced me that the securitization sector is extremely vital to the financial system.  Its recovery is important, and it continues to need help. I think it does raise the question, in terms of exit, of whether we will have to extend the TALF further in order to continue that support, particularly for CMBS, beyond June 1 of next year.  So at this time, I think it is sensible to extend the TALF.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Financial market conditions have indeed improved, and there is increased evidence that the economy has bottomed out with all of the mixed signals that turning points generally experience and, therefore, it is poised to grow somewhat in the second half of the year.  Based on these developments in the outlook, I see no compelling reason to increase our purchases of long-term assets.  Indeed, I would prefer that we 
cut back the scale of our MBS purchases somewhat.  Our current rate of purchase is outstripping the issuance, and the Feds share of that market is significant.  We are potentially crowding out private investors and risk preventing the healing process from progressing and, in doing so, perhaps permanently affecting the functioning of this important market.  Thus, I am going to favor beginning to taper our rate of purchases of MBS immediately.  Doing so would have two primary benefits.  It would allow us to better gauge whether private financial intermediation in MBS is improving and thus allow us to recalibrate our total asset purchases based on those additional data. If the experience is good, we may not choose to reach the maximum we indicatedthat is, the $1.25 billion.  If we have concerns, we can always extend the purchases into next year. Given the increased stability in residential real estate markets and the improvements in intermediation in some other MBS markets, my expectation is that the MBS market will improve and that we will be able to pull back.   I welcomed yesterdays discussion of the tools we will use to tighten policy when the time comes.  Improving the efficiency of interest on excess reserves is an important avenue.  But given the size of our balance sheet, as I indicated yesterday, I wouldnt want to rely entirely on just this. I think we need to discuss whether or not we are prepared to sell assets, even if it means taking losses on our balance sheet, should the need arise.  I for one would want to do so if 
our price stability goals required it.  Another element that would help our efforts in this regard to maintain price stability is to continue to pursue our efforts to implement inflation targeting.  I appreciate the difficult political environment we are in, but I hope we dont lose sight of that initiative. As I have stated in the past, I think the language in our statement should be modified with a view toward our eventual exit from the zero bound.  That means trying to find a way to 
 extricate ourselves from the current exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for extended periods. At some point, we will have to move away from the extended language.  I believe we should be preparing ourselves and the markets for that eventuality.  My preference would be to say that the Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 
zero to  percent and anticipates that economic conditions will likely warrant low levels of the funds rate for a period of time.  Just drop extended. The options in alternatives A and C are, however, worse than the current language in my view. At least the use of extended period can be interpreted as a state-contingent or a state-dependent context. I think that replacing state-contingent language with time-dependent language is misguided for a number of reasons, not the least of which is that we actually make policy on a state-contingent basis. Tying ourselves to a time table, given the tremendous uncertainty surrounding the future economic conditions, I believe is not wise.  In general, I would prefer alternative C, without the time-dependent language because it scales back our asset purchases. I would be comfortable, though, with alternative B or B (revised) if we indicate that we will immediately begin to taper the pace of MBS purchases without necessarily committing to an end amount or an end date.  We have already said that we will go to $1.25 trillion, yet we may not want to get there. We dont have to decide that yet.  But reducing the pace immediately would give us some flexibility to allow the private markets to gradually reenter this market and would let us reemphasize that policy decisions are in fact state-dependent.  We might want to stop the agency debt purchases altogether, given the size of that market.  But the amount is not very significant, so I dont feel terribly strongly about that.  Thus my preference would be to replace the sentence regarding MBS with something very simple like the Desk is authorized to 
 purchase up to $200 billion in household-related agency debt and up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS. The Desk is expected to gradually slow the pace of purchases of these securities as markets improve. Finally, Mr. Chairman, I think we must be very careful in our interpretation of recent declines in inflation. A tremendous run-up in oil prices in 200708 had both a significant effect on headline inflation and, to some degree, a pass-through into core inflation.  We are fortunate that expectations remained well anchored during that period, and we were helped when oil prices made a sudden, dramatic reversal and declined.  I think this oil price decline accounts for much of what we have seen this year in the decline in inflation, though expectations have been remarkably stable throughout this period, which is a very good sign.  Apparently, the markets are looking through the large relative price changes, both in the again. So I think we must be careful not to attribute inflation to last years oil prices and then attribute the reduction in inflation this year or the risk of persistent deflation to output gaps.  That is my view.  Those are two sides of the same coin.  We will learn more, I think, about underlying inflation pressures, or lack thereof, in coming quarters as we have a more stable period of oil prices, so that it is not jerking around both headline and core inflation.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. I am thinking about what President Plosser just said.  I havent changed my hawkish feathers, but I dont want to be anybodys pigeon.  I think we have to be cognizant of what is actually happening in the microeconomic sector.  Yesterday I spoke of post-traumatic slack syndrome, and I want to expand slightly upon that to explain why I am in favor of alternative B. On the run-up side, which was only a year ago, what business women and men did 
was to tighten the cost of goods sold. They were ferociously driven by the fact that everything under their control was accelerating in price. Now that they cannot grow their top lines, they are continuing that process.  I will give you an example.  If you look at the spending pulse data that is compiled by MasterCardand this is not yet public to my knowledge, because it goes until the end of Julyand you look at the airline industry, the spending pulse data will tell you that revenues for airlines were up 1.6 percent year over year in July.  Airfares were down 14 percent. What accounts for the difference?  A 48 percent increase in transactions.  They are nickel and diming everybody on baggage, what you pay for food, et cetera, et cetera, and that is how they have made up the shortfall.  You can see this also roll over into the way small business suppliers are being treated. In my conversations with the CEO of AT&T, he told me that he listens in to their small business call center.  Fifty percent of the current calls are women and men in small businesses begging to have their phone bills reduced by at least half.  Bad debts are rising, and they have other pressures operating upon them. My point is this: We are likely to have significant slack for some time.  We are unlikely to see cap-ex grow, as I mentioned earlier, for some time.  And, yes, Mr. Chairman, we have to be careful not to make assumptions that are somehow different from those in previous recoveries. But I think that, on a microeconomic level, the shock that business women and men have gone through does condition their response and is likely to lead to an additional lag in cap-ex and give pause to hiring new workers for a longer period than we would like, particularly in the globalized environment in which we live and which in previous recessions didnt exist to the extent we have today.  So we know that in the short term, for several quarters at least, slack does have an effect on price movements and inflation.  Long term, we know from Milton Friedman and others that sustained inflation is always a monetary phenomenon. 
 Therefore, I think it is important that we recognize reality.  We are likely to have a snapback here. It may be somewhat frisky in the short term, assisted by inventory corrections, as you mentioned, and more-felicitous market conditions, such as have been described at the table.  The longer-term outlook is still somewhat tenuous, so we have to take account of that.  We also have to take account of the still-palpable concern that we may or may not be willing to pull the trigger. Mind you, I come from a state where even the former Vice President of the United 
States did not hesitate to pull the trigger.  I think all of us have made an effortin addition to the tools laid outto make it clear that we are not going to be hesitant.  Therefore, I think it is very important that we signal clearly that we are not going to buy Treasuries beyond the number that we mentioned.  I was against it in the beginning. I am still against it.  I am happy to see it die.  I think it shows that we have resolve. That, combined with the statement that, if I understood correctly, you will issue on Thursday at the Board, that we willand I am quoting you, Mr. Chairmansuspend consideration of additional asset classes while we extend the timeline to March 31.  To me that is sufficient to indicate that, indeed, we have the resolve to do what we are going to do.  At the same time, it doesnt cut off the salutary effects of what I think we are doing to offset the forces 
that I just described. So I would favor alternative B. I do not favor alternative B or B (revised). To me, those are like St. Augustines prayer, O Lord, help me to be pure, but not yet.  I think we should proceed to show our resolve.  Alternative B does it, and it also reflects the reality of the current 
economic circumstances.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Is the coffee ready, do you think? [Laughter] All right. It is 10:30. Why dont we take a 20-minute break. 
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why dont we recommence.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The baseline forecast has inflation too low and unemployment too high for the next several years.  Such a forecast would almost surely imply further easing, if we had not hit the zero bound.  The asset-purchase program has probably helped stabilize markets and lowered key interest rates compared with what they would have been without the purchases. However, the amount of macroeconomic stimulus produced to date by our large asset purchases has been smaller than I expected.  In part, our implementation continues to favor market functioning over the broader macroeconomic goals of pushing rates down more aggressively to more rapidly achieve desired macroeconomic outcomes.  Given 
current implementation strategies, I prefer alternative B (revised), though I remain concerned about the pace of a likely recovery and would favor more-aggressive measures if the economy were to falter or the risk of significant disinflation were to increase.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, favor alternative B (revised). Despite the series of positive surprises that President Stern pointed out yesterday, since March the center of gravity of expectations around this table is for a slow recoverymaybe a little faster than the Greenbook but not muchand damped inflation.   I think it is way too early to signal that we are thinking about withdrawing or cutting back on stimulus, so that leaves one with two consequences.  I would keep the extended period language in there unchanged, and I would not curtail the large-scale asset-purchase programs.  I would complete our announced purchases, with the possible exception of the agency securities, as that market is not liquid enough.  I would taper off those mortgage-backed security purchases 
over the fourth quarter and maybe into the first quarter to get up to the total, but I am okay with waiting until next meeting to tell the public what we are going to do there.  I think the public is expecting something like alternative B (revised).  They wont miss it, and we can do that next time.  I am okay with winding up the Treasury purchase program.  The economic situation is improving.  There are some costs in terms of concerns about the exit strategy and our ability to keep inflation low. But I wouldnt rule out anything for the future, including resuming the purchases under certain circumstances.   I think we need to keep all our options open.  As President Rosengren just said, the central tendency itself isnt a really satisfactory outcome relative to our legislative mandate.  
There is huge uncertainty. And while there is upside risk, there is still a lot of downside risk as well. And, there are nontrivial odds on whether we get a slow recovery, inflation begins to abate, unemployment rises, and bank losses mount further, and we are back into a kind of adverse feedback loop in the financial markets.  I dont think that is what is going to happen, but I think there is some possibility.  There are lots of things we need to think about if the economy starts going down and if we start getting into a deflationary situation. In that case, if we were to resume Treasury purchases while inflation was going down and while the economy was weakening, there wouldnt be adverse consequences for inflation expectations.  So all of those things lead me to want to keep all of the options open, and I think alternative B (revised) does a good job of that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B (revised). I think it has at least two important virtues. One is that it maintains our flexibility, and the second is that it is likely to do no harm.  [Laughter] And I think these are both constructive. 
 I have given some serious thought to alternative C, but I really think it is premature to go to something like that.  In that connection, I have been asking myself if it is possible that the economy will grow considerably more rapidly over the next six quarters than I currently expect and than is indicated in the Greenbook. And I just dont see the ingredients, the precursors, for something like that over that time frame.  So I think alternative C is premature at this point. In light of the discussion, I have also been thinking some more about the inflation situation and the inflation outlook.  I have never been a particular enthusiast of the gap models, mainly because my impression is that you have to work pretty hard empirically to get a significant and stable relationship.  I guess if you work hard enough you can, but I dont think it is overwhelming.  The staff can correct me if I have mischaracterized that situation.  On the other hand, it takes a model to beat a model, and I dont think we have another model in the short run.  So we are kind of left with that. But in the longer run, I do think it pays to look at the monetary aggregates. In particular, if you look at M2, you see thatgoing back as far as 2003, anyway growth there has been pretty moderate for a sustained period of time, something between 5 and 6 percent on average.  It was certainly rapid last year.  It was certainly rapid in the first quarter of this year, but it has tapered off again. I certainly dont see in the aggregate data a case for a sustained near-term burst of inflationnear-term meaning within the next six or eight quarters. You might say, Well, the monetary base gives you a different picture; but if the base were so reliable, we would have targeted it. I think we have learned that its relation to broader aggregates and to things like inflation just isnt very convincing even in the longer run.  So I dont see a significant inflation threat in the near term.  I do think, if you look at those M2 numbers, we may want to bring those down consistent with the price stability part of the dual 
mandate eventually.  But there doesnt seem to be any urgency to it, and I think the deceleration required isnt likely to be terribly great. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we need to be very careful going forward and watch the banking system very carefully as we continue with our large-scale asset-purchase program, as we discussed yesterday.  I dont think of discussing cutting back on additional purchases as withdrawing stimulus so much as reducing the size of the planned increase in stimulus.  Our understanding of just what will happen when we reach this 
discontinuity, when our asset holdings drive short-term liquidity facility usage to zero, is significant.  And there is a chance that we may inadvertently at that time begin increasing our stimulus quite powerfully and more than we expect and more than we intend, just at a time when we are starting to consider withdrawing stimulus or reducing the amount of stimulus we provide in light of a strengthening economy. I see some merit in alternative C for this reasonto hedge our bets somewhat with the economy turning and downside risk moderating.  In addition, I think there are abundant reasonsat least, I see abundant reasonsto be deeply uncomfortable with large-scale holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities. There is a senseand I think this was explicitly acknowledged in the design of the programthat it is impeding a structural transition to whatever is next by way of the configuration of our housing finance system.  But it also involves some very serious political entanglements that I have alluded to before and that give me pause about our ability to flexibly shed that portfolio should we find the need to do so. However, I am prepared at this meeting to support alternative B (revised) for now.  Along with President Stern, I think it is a little premature to scale back our announcement about what 
 we intend with mortgage-backed securities.  But, again, we need to be very watchful of what is going on in the banking system with reserve holdings, and it might be good to mount an effort to do that on a very systematic and granular basis.  More broadly, with the economy turning, I think it is time to stop looking around for credit spreads to fix.  As I said yesterday, our interventions in some segments of the credit market have reduced the supply of credit to other segments, and there are always going to be markets in which some spreads are elevated compared with the spreads that prevail in markets in which we have intervened.  That is just always going to be the case from now on.  Moreover, continuing to add market segments or to extend the life of 
programs beyond this point in the business cycle could be mistaken for an intention that we will extend our intervention deeper into the next expansion.   We have talked a lot about exit strategy. But when we have done so, it has been in the narrow sense of the capacity to manipulate our balance sheet and our policy tools in a way so as to raise the federal funds rate. Mr. Chairman, you have done a very good job of articulating our capacity and the tools we have for doing that and, I think, have allayed a lot of concerns in the publics mind about our ability.  But one byproduct of the way in which we have done that is that some of the means of doing so allow for the continued coexistence of fairly broad and deep interventionin other words, a large balance sheet and raising interest rates on reserves and so raising the funds rate without reducing our balance sheet.   That leaves open the broader question about our intervention in credit markets.  I think the other sense of exit strategy that we need to ponder is the nature of our engagement in credit markets and what transition that is going to display over the next couple of years.  I am assumingI may be wrong as we havent talked about thisthat at some point in the expansion we will want it to be the case that we are no longer intervening in any market, even MBS.  And I 
   think that communicating about that transition would be useful and thinking about it would be useful as well. We have intervened on the basis that emergencies in credit markets warrant protecting the economy from damage from credit market malfunctions.  And when the economy recovers and is growing strongly, it seems to me that the compelling need for that will be diminished.  On the other hand, it is not clear that we have articulated principles that would necessarily lead an observer to believe that in an expansion we wouldnt be intervening.  I refer again to the list of pros and cons that we heard yesterday about agency ARMs that make it seem as if elevated credit spreads are a primary consideration for a lot of these programs.  So I think it would useful for us to think more broadly about the transition we intend to make from the current level of engagement and intervention in credit markets to whatever the sort of normalcy 
is beyond that. This sets aside what we want people to expect from us in the next recession, which is another problem as well and another set of issues we need to grapple with at some point. But, again, I can support alternative B (revised).  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, I think that there is pretty strong consensus that we do need to normalize and move out of special intervention as the economy recovers. And we have taken some steps in that direction, including letting one facility expire, reducing the size of others, and announcing this week that we are not going to add any categories to the TALF program.  So I think we agree with your perspective on that. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the revised version of alternative B.  I do want to emphasize, though, that I believe a strong case exists for further monetary stimulus.  This case is amply demonstrated by the unconstrained optimal policy path in the Bluebook, 
 which shows the nominal federal funds rate continuing to ease over the next four quarters and reaching negative 6 percent.  Moreover, even in the unlikely circumstance that we are lucky enough to get robust economic growth over the next few years, it will still be a long time before the economy is operating close to full employment.  And I found it striking that in none of the alternative scenarios in the Greenbook, even including the most optimistic one, would the Committee need to raise interest rates this year or in 2010. With regard to asset purchases, I would not argue for expanding our Treasury purchases.  I think it would be unwise at this time.  The bang for the buck from these purchases is probably pretty small, and our program has had some unfortunate costs.  It appears to be contributing to the growing concern about high long-term inflation.  Even though I dont favor raising our current target for Treasury purchases now, I consider it important that we avoid completely 
closing the door on future Treasury purchases. I would associate myself with Governor Kohns comment that there could certainly come a time when the economic outlook worsens considerably. We shouldnt rule out that possibility, and further long-term Treasury purchases could, in that type of scenario, be needed to stimulate the economy, so we shouldnt rule out the use of that policy tool. The revised version of alternative B keeps the option open.  I think the wording of the original version of B would be likely to be read as closing the door to future purchases, and I dont think we need the more explicit language in alternative B that says that we are prepared to consider resuming purchases. With respect to MBS and agency purchases, I am in favor of preserving our optionality, waiting to decide until closer to when the program comes to a conclusion in the same way that we did with Treasuries. Again, I wouldnt want to take anything off the table at this point.  If we were to announce today either scaling back on the amounts we expect to purchase or announce 
  that we intend to end those programs, I think it would surprise markets and ratify expectations that it wont be too long before we start raising the funds rate. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor a continued wait-and-see approach, which I think is best captured roughly by alternative B, the revised version.  I would make some observations. The modest recovery in GDP is in progress, and the expected peak in the unemployment rate is six or more months away.  The Greenbook and Bluebook measures of our policy stance suggest to me that they are near policy accommodation stances that close the resource gaps within three years. I know we could hope to do better, but I think we pushed our nontraditional policies pretty far, and the remaining fruit is hanging pretty high.  I agree with President Stern when he says that sometimes there is just not a lot more that you can do or that you should consider doing. I interpret the prospective resource slack that we are facing to be large, and this is going to restrain inflationary influences from economic improvements and low policy rates.  I thought Governor Kohn did an excellent job of discussing the inflation prospects and walking us through inflation expectations and the resource gap and how they are interacting or how we have to take account of those. It does appear that inflation expectations have remained higher than one might 
have expected with this slack. That has been important, I think, for the evolution of inflation. That said, we are in uncharted territory with respect to the enormous expansion of our balance sheet and the publics reaction to this, and so liquidity growth and historic-sized fiscal deficits as far as the eye can see are going to present a challenge at least from the publics expectations. The narrow measures of money that we would look to as very troubling are not yet 
  in the broader measures, and I think that that is an important part of what we would be paying attention to if we saw large inflationary expectations.   For me, our current setting of policy seems appropriately accommodative to balance these risks.  Lets be patient and monitor the situation more.  Until something breaks one way or the other, I would expect this type of policy outcome.  When the situation clarifies, we should make the appropriate judgments.  It could be that the downside risk appears and it is quite bad and we need to do something or the other way around.  I do not see the need to signal an alternative B about future programs.   So alternative B, the revised version.  I didnt see the tremendous value in mentioning tapering off for Treasuries, given the deep market that we have, but that doesnt seem to be expressed by others. So I am fine with that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support the revised version of alternative B. Given the large output gap that I see closing only slowly and an inflation rate projection that remains low over the forecast period, I am comfortable maintaining the current level of monetary stimulus.  Market participants clearly recognize that our Treasury security purchases will cumulate to a level near the stated objective around the time of the next meeting.  So it seems appropriate to recognize this in our statement today, to be more transparent about our intentions, and I think alternative B does that well.  Also, as Brian mentioned, it is not necessary to specify at this meeting changes to our purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. So I prefer to wait until our September meeting to comment on those purchases.  Like others, I believe that it is important to leave our options open, and the revised version of 
alternative B gives us, I think, the appropriate flexibility that we need.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B, the revised version. I think the tapering ideas that have been expressed by the staff are fine, and I also think that we can think about tapering the MBS program at the next meeting.  As you know, I have suggested growth rates instead of these flat, level amounts, which I find a bit arbitrary.  They are still in this Bluebook with $450 billion in alternative A.  You may want to think about moving to very low growth rates for these programs.  You know, a lot of people have expressed the idea about keeping the programs alive.  You can move to very low growth rates, and Ill talk a little more about that in a minute.  If we did that, we could react more easily if the data came in worse than expected and we wanted to again expand asset-purchase programs. On policies to manage excess reserves, that sounds as though were planning to rely a lot on our interest-on-reserves policy.  I have a comment on that.  I think it sounds expensive. It could be viewed as a large transfer to banks in an environment where that would be politically quite unpopular. As I understand it, the Congress opposed interest on reserves for decades exactly because of the revenue implications.  So this is just a caution that it seems as though we are going down this path pretty rapidly and we are putting a lot of emphasis on interest on reserves as a way to manage the very extensive excess reserves that are in the system, and it could be viewed in an unflattering light. President Stern made some comments about the monetary base, and because I have the last word and its his last meeting, Im going to comment on that.  It is true that, if you run regressions over the last 25 years on the monetary base, you are not going to get very much.  But 
  I just want to stress that we are in an absolutely unprecedented situation.  We have more than doubled the size of the monetary base.  I do not think you can rely on whatever those regressions said in the past as to what the outcomes of this experiment might be.  So we have to be very careful in thinking about what the implications are going forward.  Of course, it all has to do with, well, how would that ever get out into the money supply and so on, and what are future policies?  How permanent is it, so on and so forth?  How much slack is there in the economy? All of those things are important, but this is an unprecedented experiment in U.S. monetary policy. Let me turn to communication for a minute.  I take the lesson of the last 25 years in macroeconomics to be that it is important to communicate future policy partly because you care 
about the future but also partly because it really affects your equilibrium outcomes today.  It informs the pricing today.  We do not really have that for this asset-purchase program.  I think we made some progress in talking about exit strategy, and I actually think that was pretty successful during the intermeeting period.  But still, there is a lot of uncertainty about future policy, say, over the next two years and about what we would do. I agree with President Yellen that, if we went with alternative B unrevised, it could be interpreted that the Fed goes on hold. We have said that we are not going to do any more asset purchases. According to the Greenbook, we are not going to raise the funds rate off zero for a long time.  So we just go on hold for two years. I dont think that is really the intent of the Committee, and I would not want to lock us in that direction.  As many people have said and I 
think Governor Tarullo said, you have a pretty high probability that you will get an outcome that isnt very desirable over the next two years.  Then the question is what the Feds reaction will be, 
and I think you have to keep the option open that you might extend the asset purchases at that 
   point. The market doesnt know what we will do; this Committee doesnt know what we will do. If we could reduce that uncertainty, that would help us a lot.  I would like to make some progress toward a more systematic policy on asset purchases and more generally a systematic policy while we are at the zero bound. Let me just make a couple more comments.  Fixed dates for rates at zerosome of the language in these policy options says things like we will keep rates low until the end of the year or we will keep rates at zero until the middle of next year.  I really prefer not to get into the particular dates for when we might raise rates.  I think it does two things that we dont like.  First of all, it de-emphasizes the state-contingent nature of optimal policy.  Everything depends on the 
data. It depends on how the data on the economy come in.  So I do not think that we should be saying, all of a sudden, that we are going to make it non-state contingent and that just at this certain date we are going to do something. Also, I think it sets up an expectation that we really will raise rates at that point, and we may not want to do that at that point.  This is not in alternative B, but it is in the other alternatives.  I think it is not something we want to get into in any of our alternatives. Lastly, I agree with President Plosser and many others who have commented here concerning the narrative that slack alone will contain inflation pressures going forward, which is really reflected in paragraph 2 of our statement and has been there for a long time in alternative B. I think too much reliance on this view could lead to a policy mistake and a repeat of the 1970s experience. There are three problems with the output gap.  One is the conceptual problems that were outlined by President Lacker.  Another is empirical fit, as mentioned by President Stern. No matter how you do the measurement, it just doesnt help you that much in forecasting inflation. It helps a little, not much.  And the third one, which has not been 
mentioned, is that it is also inconsistent with a lot of our rhetoric about a bursting bubble.  If you think that something went wrong and you had some housing bubble or some other kind of bubble and this thing collapsed on you, you cant be saying, well, we want to go back up to this bubble level of output. When you get into the discussions of potential output, bubbles are out of the picture, right?  But when youre talking about the economy and the situation today, bubbles are a big part of the story. So thats another piece that I think is inconsistent with our current rhetoric about output gaps. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just a question about your comment on the base.  Why wouldnt Japan be a precedent for this experiment? MR. BULLARD. It is a great example to look at.  I dont think theirs was that persistent, and so they didnt get that much inflation.  Ours is looking pretty persistent. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me give the background on where I come out on this.  That is, as I mentioned yesterday, the evidence is that we are at or near the bottom of this cycle.  At least the evidence is pointing that way, and in that environment at this point, we obviously have excess capacity:  railroads, 50 percent in use.  That is to be expected.  But I think as we look ahead, we are starting to see improvement, and that should continue and perhaps accelerate, given the fiscal and monetary policy that is in place.  So it is not where we are; it is where we are going that matters importantly as we consider our choices.  I am not suggesting here that we tighten or exit where we are from a current easing policy, but only that we, as President Lacker said, stop increasing our purchases or increasing our easing process and back off in that because we cant exit until we complete our entry into this, and I think its time to complete that.  We may not see inflation or asset bubbles now.  I think that is clear.  But the 
 more we pump into this balloon, the larger it will eventually be and the more difficult it will be to bring back down. And that is what I think we need to begin to think about if we are, in fact, recovering. So my view is that we begin to signal that we are.  I think that is perhaps what alternative B (revised) does. Although I would like to see us begin tapering immediately, I would be in favor of that alternative and that, as soon as possible, we stop purchasing assets and turn to the TAF and the primary credit facility as means of providing liquidity into the intermediation process or the banking industry and allow our economy to move more toward normality.  So my immediate goal is to cease purchasing assets and cease growing our balance sheet or allow our balance sheet to begin to shrink normally.  But the reality is that I think alternative B (revised) is the reasonable place to be at this point.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B as revised.  Let me confine my remarks to the asset-purchase discussion in that alternative.  First, with respect to the Treasury purchases, I think that the Treasury purchase experiment has been a testament to the strengths of this institution.  I think we have had differences of opinion going back to discussions of last December on the merits of this program.  We debated it, we all marshaled our arguments, and we all decided at least publicly to support this experiment.  I think the stars have given us an opportunity to deftly exit the Treasury purchases.  Alternative B as revised gives us the flexibility, if circumstances warrant, to hold hands yet again, but Id consider the prospects of that to be quite unlikely. The data of the intermeeting months on the Treasury purchases, particularly given the question of fiscal sustainability coming from the other branch of government, have made this particularly problematic for us to undertake successfully.  I do think 
the benefits have been outweighed by the costs, but we do have an opportunity to end it in way that lives up to the commitment that we made some months ago but doesnt go beyond that.  I think alternative B as revised also does provide that flexibility should the situation change. On the tapering question that President Evans raised, my own sense is that it would not be necessary, if we had only Treasuries as part of our asset purchase, to go with the tapering.  Even out of an abundance of caution I dont think that it would be necessary.  The reason that I suspect its a prudent move for us now is that it will be a signal to markets that, when we do undertake the mortgage-backed security discussion probably at our next meeting, they will have seen some bread crumbs as to how we could think about exiting or at least about cutting back on these. So all in all, I would favor the tapering approach, not because of Treasuries but because of the signaling effect on MBS. On the mortgage-backed securities, as President Yellen suggested, I think that we should take advantage of the option value and defer our discussion on that.  I would be interested in staffs thoughts in advance of that meeting as to what the net benefits are of our continued presence in that market.  So while I do think there were marginal benefits, maybe even meaningful benefits, at the beginning of the MBS program, we are well past the point of diminishing returns on that.  I look forward to a broader discussion come September. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given my pessimism about credit availability and concern about the likelihood of alternative scenarios, I started thinking about, well, if they 
came to pass, what policy action might we take. My thoughts are probably further colored by the time that I have spent with the TALF and with the staff working on the TALF.  But as I look at 
 the experience with the commercial paper facilities and the ABS markets, I do see signs that the markets outside of our purchases have improved. Then as we looked at the RMBS for the TALF, it became clear that the problems in the private mortgage market were probably beyond our tools to repair.  So although we have talked about a lot of market improvement, the only mortgage market now and for the foreseeable future is the government-supported market.  And I see the very likely need to support the mortgage market at least through visibility of how the GSEs might be resolved and perhaps even through that transition, and I hope that we would see some signs of how the private mortgage market might actually reemerge before we withdraw support to that market. So the MBS purchases in relation to the total outstanding and the originations right now are large, but it seems quite likely to me that we will need to extend the support, at least in time if not in total, well past March 2010.  I dont see a similar need to expand Treasury purchases, and the tapering certainly prepares the way for a much bigger tapering job ahead with the MBS purchases. But I think we really do need to look at what we might need to do longer term on the mortgage market and when we announce what we are going to do on that.  And I do support alternative B (revised). CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. I support alternative B (revised) for a lot of the reasons a lot of you have stated to this point. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First I want to make two brief comments, one on the dry tinder concept that we brought up at the last meeting and the other one on potential changes in the NAIRU.  The reason I want to bring these up is that I think 
 they are both relevant in terms of our communication strategy and our ability, by consistent messaging, to keep inflation expectations well anchored.  If we do not speak with a relatively consistent voice, I think we run risks in that dimension. The last time the view was expressed that excess reserves sitting on banks balance sheets are essentially dry tinder that could quickly fuel excessive credit creation and put the Fed behind the curve in terms of tightening monetary policy.  I have to admit that, in terms of imagery, this concern does seem compelling.  The banks are sitting on piles of money that could be used to extend credit on a moments notice.  However, I think this reasoning ignores a very, very important point.  Based on how monetary policies have been conducted for the past several decades, banks have always had the ability to expand credit whenever they like.  They dont need a pile of dry tinder in the form of excess reserves to do so.  Thats because the Fed has committed itself to supply sufficient reserves to keep the federal funds rate at its target.  If banks want to expand credit and that drives up the demand for reserves, the Fed automatically meets that demand in its conduct of monetary policy.  So in terms of the ability of banks to expand credit rapidly, it makes no difference whether they have lots of excess reserves or not.  I think it is an important point. In terms of the NAIRU, there has been some discussion that the NAIRU may have moved up. I certainly do not dispute that idea and its implications.  But I think there is an implication that is sort of implied by some that this might be a reason to exit from our current stance of monetary policy somewhat earlier than otherwise.  I think we need to be careful about exaggerating the potential import of the possibility of a somewhat higher NAIRU.  The key question in a world where the unemployment rate is currently 9.4 percent and likely to rise higher is how much the NAIRU has increased.  To get an idea of what might be in the feasible 
   set of outcomes, we looked at the CBOs estimates of the NAIRU, which extend back 55 years.  I am not saying that the CBOs estimates of the NAIRU are perfect, but they are an interesting starting point. We found that the largest three-year increase in their estimate of the NAIRU over this 55-year period was 0.3 percentage point, and at its highest point in this fifty-five-year history, the NAIRU was still below 6 percent. So what do I make of this?  Well, it implies to me that, even if one thinks that the NAIRU has increased, it is implausible to think that it has increased sufficiently to change the story meaningfully over the next couple of years.  We have a large output gap that is going to take a long time to close.  Thus, arguing that the NAIRU may be higher is likely just to confuse market participants about the issue at hand unless we can credibly claim that the NAIRU has increased so much that we are going to hit this very, very quickly.  I do not think that claim is plausible.  So I would be counseling people not to make this argument because it is going to confuse people about how quickly we are going to exit from our monetary policy regime. With respect to the statement, I favor alternative B as revised.  I think the case for expanding Treasury securities is very weakfirst, given the improvement in financial conditions and the economic outlook.  When we did this in March, it was with considerable reluctance, I think, but it was because the outlook was really quite grim, and the outlook has improved significantly since then. Second, there are lots of uncertainties about what this would mean for inflation expectations, and that is the part of the Treasury purchase program that was always wrought with some peril, and we found out that there was really some risk associated with that in terms of that dimension.  Third, market participants do not expect us to expand it.  So I think that we should stick with alternative B as revised, where we basically say were bringing it to an end with the taper. I think Governor Warsh is absolutely correct that the tapering is not necessary for 
Treasuries but it is a good signaling device to imply what we are likely to do with the other programs. Financial conditions have improved considerably since the last meeting.  I think that is important.  It means that abstracting from other factors, such as the GDP revisions, the optimal unconstrained funds rate is considerably less negative now than it was at the last meeting.  But it still remains below the zero bound by most measures at a relatively high degree of confidence.  That suggests to me that a steady-as-she-goes policy for the time being is the right one.  That means keeping the pre-commitment of an extended period in place and completing the purchase programs that we had committed to earlier.  I have a strong presumption that, as we go forward, we are going to finish the agency MBS program.  On the agency debt program, I am sort of agnostic. I dont think it is really that important whether we stop at $150 billion or we go all the way to $200 billion. But with the agency MBS program, the market has a strong presumption 
that we are going to do the whole thing, and I would hope at the next meeting, assuming that we are still on the same economic trajectory that we think we are going to be on, that we would commit to doing the whole thing at that meeting.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you all.  If you recall last March where we were and our concerns about both the financial system and the economy, we were extremely 
aggressive; and whether by dumb luck or prescience or whatever, we seem to have hit the sweet spot. The economy is improving.  The financial markets are improving, and I see little reason to increase stimulus at this point.  At the same time, obviously there is still a lot of uncertainty about consumption, final demand, and the strength of recovery, and I think I agree with the Vice Chairman that, by any reasonable calculation at least at this point, there still is a considerable amount of excess capacity in the economy.  So on that basis there is not much case either for 
pulling back on stimulus.  At the risk of sounding Nixonian, I think we should stay the course on our policy and continue along the lines we have been following since March. I would agree with the majority of the participants in proposing that we go with the revised version of alternative B. There was little discussion this time of the descriptive paragraphs, maybe again because we hit the sweet spotI do not knowbut the output description in particular is a little more upbeat and, I think, conveys the sense that there has been noticeable improvement even though there are still some important barriers to full recovery. I think that there is considerable agreement around the table that we should allow the Treasury program to expire as previously signaled.  I think the revised version of alternative B will be read primarily as saying that the FOMC is allowing this program to expire.  There is a bit of flexibility in the sense that we do not completely rule out a future program, and as Governor 
Kohn has pointed out, there could be contingencies in which we might want to consider a future program.  But I think it will be read mostly as just a bit of prudence on the part of the Committee to leave that potential option open for the future.  Again, I think the primary signal will be that the program is being allowed to expire. I agree with the Vice Chairman that the tapering aspect is useful as a signal.  It is going to essentially provide a bit of foreshadowing to the markets about how we may exit from the larger agency program.  We discussed today and I gave a lot of thought to announcing a tapering of the agency programs today as well.  I found it very difficult to write that in a way that didnt sound as though we were conclusively ending those programs or going to the full extent.  What I would proposealong the lines of President Sterns parting advice, which is always wiseis to do no harm.  I propose that we have at the next meeting a robust discussion of exactly how we want to exit or proceed with the agency MBS program.  And long the lines of what President Bullard 
  said, one possibility would be to extend itto reduce the rate of purchase and extend it out.  It might be more effective in the sense that we would not be dominating the market as much but maybe have a longer horizon. Those are the kinds of issues that I think we ought to talk about in the next meeting.  On that basis, I think it is a bit wiser to leave the status quo on the agencies for this meeting, and that is also consistent with Brian Sacks memo, which suggests that we do not yet have to begin the tapering process in the agency markets.  So my recommendation would be that we allow the Treasury program to expire and that we adopt the revised version of alternative B.  And before we go further, let me just turn to Brian Madigan for a moment because there was an issue he would like to highlight on the directive related to B. MR. MADIGAN. Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to note two things for the Committee on the directive for B, which is on page 60 of the Bluebook.  First of all, of course, the directive would indicate now that the Desk is expected to purchase about $300 billion of Treasury securities rather than up to, and it includes language indicating that the Desk is to gradually slow the pace of purchases. The other point I want to make is that the following sentence is a little modified from the corresponding version in the previous directive.  The previous directive and the past few directives have indicated that the Committee anticipates that the combination of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of the Feds balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  With the liquidity facilities coming down pretty significantly, I think that it doesnt make sense to continue to describe them as causing an increase in the balance sheet.  So we have suggested deleting the reference in that sentence to the liquidity facilities. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Question? 
  MR. LACKER. Do we anticipate our purchases to expand the balance sheet significantly in coming months in view of recent history? MR. MADIGAN. Well, certainly we expect the purchases to continue to add to the balance sheet. That is laid out in our projections in the Bluebook. MR. LACKER. Havent we missed on our liquidity facility forecast? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. As you point out, President Lacker, we are getting close to the zero bound on that side.  So it looks like a good bet that we will continue to see an increase in the overall balance. MR. LACKER. So is it in the intermeeting period?  In the intermeeting period do we expect to drive this down to zero and on that basis?  Is that why we are expecting the balance sheet to expand? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Brian, do you have a reply? 
MR. MADIGAN. This is the monetary base that I am referring to, but as shown on page 51 of the Bluebook, our baseline projections show growth of 97 percent in August, 116 percent in September, and 60 percent in October.  So there is still pretty significant growth overall. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions or comments? Yes. MR. LACKER. Excuse me, I just want to be clear about the question.  You have described the forecasting procedure that goes program by program and neglects any 
consideration of the demand for reserves. And we keep missing on that basis in a way that suggests that the demand for reserves is driving demand for liquidity facilities, not the other way around. So I just raise the question. That is why I was asking.  Mr. Chairman, you called for a 
robust discussion next meeting of the MBS program; I think that is great.  This consideration, 
           which we have been discussing, deserves some attention there, too.  What staff work could be done on that might be useful as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the staff will look at that.  I think it is an interesting question, how much is pure substitution and how much the general improvements in markets are changing demand as well.  Any other questions or comments either for me or for Brian? Seeing none, Debbie, would you call the roll? MS. DANKER. Yes. This vote encompasses the language of alternative B (revised) for the August FOMC statement and the directive from page 60 of the Bluebook. Chairman Bernanke Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley Yes 
Governor Duke Yes President Evans Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Lacker Yes President Lockhart Yes 
Governor Tarullo Yes 
Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  The next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, September 22 and 23.  There is a buffet lunch available.  There will be no further business or presentations.  So if you are able to stay, please do, and I guess we will be seeing each other next in Jackson Hole.  Thank you very much.  The meeting is adjourned. END OF MEETING 
               
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 2223, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 22, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, September 23, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher and Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Tracy, Weinberg, and Wilcox, Associate Economists Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors 
     
 
  
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________  Ms. Barger and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Banking Supervision and Regulation and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Reifschneider, and Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Divisions of Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively Mr. Hakkio, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rasche, Rudebusch, and Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Cleveland, respectively 
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Mr. McCarthy and Ms. OConnor, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mr. Chatterjee, Senior Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  Attended Tuesdays session only. 
     Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on September 2223, 2009 September 22Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon. MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. KOHN. May I interrupt? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Please. 
MR. KOHN. Id like to congratulate you on your reappointment.  I think youve provided critical leadership to the Committee through these past, sometimes difficult, years.  Im glad the President recognized that you are the best person for the future, and Im sure the Senate 
will agree very shortly, so congratulations.  [Applause] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And many thanks to the Committee for the collegial work and discussions weve had through a very difficult period.  I appreciate how much weve all pulled together and dealt with some of these enormous problems. I need a motion to close the Board meeting. 
MR. KOHN. So moved. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me first welcome Jim Lyon to the table.  Jim will be sitting in Gary Sterns spot.  Gary retired, as you know, two weeks ago, and we will have a 
luncheon tomorrow after the meeting to honor Gary. The first item on the agenda is financial developments, open market operations, and System credit facilities.  Well start with a briefing from the Desk by Brian Sack.  Well have a Q&A after that, and then well follow that with some additional staff briefings.  Brian? 
                                                          1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Prices on a broad range of risky assets continued to rise over the intermeeting period, fueled by an improving economic outlook and the low level of financing rates arising from the current stance of monetary policy. Broad equity indexes, shown in the upper left panel, rose more than 7 percent on balance, adding to the sizable recovery since the end of the first quarter.  Corporate bond spreads, the upper right, edged down further, leaving them dramatically improved from their levels earlier in the year. The gains over the past six months owe primarily to a more optimistic assessment of the economic outlook and a perception that the downside risks to growth have diminished.  Indeed, as captured in our primary dealer survey in the middle left panel, the upward revision in the expected path of GDP growth from earlier in the year has been substantial. In addition, respondents also indicated that the downside risks around the expected growth path diminished notably over this period.  This shift has reduced the amount of uncertainty that investors see in risky asset prices, as indicated by the relatively low levels of implied volatility on equities, shown to the right. The gains in asset prices have been so dramatic that market observers have begun to wonder whether the markets have become too frothy, with some pointing to the 
extensive liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve as a contributing factor.  By many metrics, however, asset valuations do not look too extended.  The Board staffs 
measure of the equity premium, shown in the bottom left panel, is still high by historical standards. Likewise, by many measures, corporate yield spreads still look relatively high, taking into account the outlook for defaults.  As shown in the bottom  right, expected corporate defaults have fallen substantially since earlier in the year, which likely explains a considerable portion of the narrowing of corporate yield spreads. Overall, risky asset prices have come a long way over the past six months, but so has the economic environment that they reflect. In contrast to the more accommodative conditions in financial markets, banks continued to restrict credit to private borrowers.  As shown in the upper left panel of exhibit 2, the volume of private loans at commercial banks (the dark blue line) has declined sharply. This decline has not been driven by a lack of available funds, as deposits (the orange line) have risen sharply and other sources of funding have become more readily available.  In fact, banks have been accumulating Treasury and agency securities (the light blue line) over this period. However, they have less appetite for adding credit risk to their portfolios, as they continue to repair their balance sheets and face additional loan write-downs going forward. Part of the decline in bank credit also reflects weaker demand.  The business sector as a whole has little need to raise new funds, and net borrowing by the sector has been negative in recent months.  In addition, firms with access to the market have shifted towards corporate bonds as a source of financing.  This shift can be seen in the 
        amount of high-yield debt that has been issued since the first quarter, the upper right panel. The pattern for consumer credit is similar in some regards.  Overall, consumer credit is contracting sharply, despite the issuance of a decent volume of consumer-related ABS. As shown in the middle left panel, ABS issuance reached $38 billion in the third quarter, near its pace from the previous quarter. Activity in the ABS market has been supported to a great extent by the TALF, with nearly all of the ABS deals in the third quarter brought to the market through the TALF. However, there are signs that dependence on the TALF is beginning to wane.  Most notably, even though most issuance is TALF-eligible, the amount of that issuance that is actually financed through the facility has been declining, a sign that private credit markets have improved enough to make TALF financing relatively expensive for some borrowers.  At the September subscription, for example, only 
$6 billion of the nearly $17 billion of ABS issued ended up being financed through the TALF. The better financing conditions and the greater willingness of investors to take risk have led to a further decline in ABS spreads, shown in the middle right panel.  Spreads for AAA-rated consumer ABS have returned to levels not seen since the middle of last year. Spreads also narrowed on outstanding CMBS, the bottom left, despite the ongoing worsening in the outlook for the commercial real estate sector.  The improvement in CMBS has been very much tied to government support programs, as the PPIP and the 
TALF have led market participants to anticipate greater demand for these assets.  The nine PPIP funds are in the process of raising capital and should begin purchases of assets later this year, and the TALF has now included three subscriptions covering legacy CMBS assets, financing over $4 billion of purchases.  In addition, a recently announced change by Treasury to the tax treatment of CMBS workouts seemed to provide a further boost to their prices.  Unfortunately, as shown to the right, issuance of new CMBS remains completely shut down, and the TALF has yet to fund any 
new-issue CMBS.  Thus, the commercial real estate sector faces a very difficult credit 
environment going forward. Despite the broad increase in risky asset prices, Treasury yields moved lower over the intermeeting period.  As shown in the upper left panel of exhibit 3, Treasury coupon yields declined 15 to 30 basis points, on net.  The most important sources of the decline in longer-term rates, according to our dealer survey, were a decline in inflation expectations, a reduction in upside inflation risks, and strong demand from foreign official institutions. Consistent with those responses, forward break-even inflation rates, shown to the right, moved down over the intermeeting period.  
Investors also see less interest rate risk, as suggested by the implied volatility measures shown in the middle left panel, which have fallen notably from their elevated levels over the summer.  The perceived reduction in upside inflation risk and the decline in interest rate volatility may have contributed to a narrowing of the term premium embedded in longer-term yields.   
          Investors also apparently marked down the expected path of monetary policy, as the substantial slack in the economy and other favorable inflation news supported the view that the Fed would remain on hold for an extended period.  As shown in the middle right panel, futures prices now suggest a later start to policy tightening.  That brings the market pricing closer to the results from our dealer survey.  As shown in the bottom left, most survey respondents do not expect the tightening to begin until the third quarter of 2010 or later. The FOMCs decision to taper its purchases of Treasury securities, announced at the last FOMC meeting, was well received by market participants.  This approach is widely seen by investors as a prudent exit strategy, and the announcement did not prompt any response in Treasury yields.  At present, the Desk has completed $289 billion of purchases, and it plans to wind down its remaining purchases over the 
next five weeks, as shown in the bottom right panel, while still reaching a cumulative purchase total of $300 billion. The exit from the agency debt and MBS purchase programs could prove more challenging, however. As shown in the upper left panel of the next exhibit, option-adjusted MBS spreads over Treasury yields remain unusually tight.  In our view, Federal Reserve purchases have had a substantial effect on MBS rates, partly accounting for this low level of spreads. Market participants seem to agree with that assessment.  As shown to the right, the responses to our dealer survey indicate that the purchase programs are seen as pushing down the current-coupon MBS rate by a 
significant amount, with an average response of about 60 basis points.  However, it is worth noting that only a subset of respondents chose to provide such estimates, and the responses vary over a wide range. Given these effects, some observers are concerned that the MBS rate will rise sharply as the Feds purchases come to an end.  The extent of these concerns should 
depend on ones views about how the purchase programs affect the markets.  As we 
have highlighted in recent memos, the effect on market interest rates could come primarily through the stock of assets purchased, consistent with a portfolio balance 
effect. Under that perspective, even an abrupt end of the purchase program would not create market difficulties, as the stock of assets held outside the Fed would not change discretely. However, we have also highlighted the possibility that the flow of purchases could have some effect on rates due to various market imperfections.  In that case, one might be concerned about how the market would adjust to a sharp drop-off in asset purchases by the Fed. To gauge the scope of these different effects, we asked the respondents to our dealer survey about their views on how the Feds asset purchases affect the market.  The answers did not exactly settle the issue:  In rough terms, about one-third of the respondents said that the effects arise primarily through stock effects, one-third said primarily through flow effects, and one-third said through both.  [Laughter.] Moreover, in quantifying the effects of the purchase programs, most respondents saw 
       the effects identified in the upper right panel as either partly or fully diminishing over the six-month period after purchases end, consistent with the presence of some flow effects. Given the responses from the survey, it may be prudent for the FOMC to take an exit approach that is robust to the possibility of both stock and flow effects.  This consideration was the basis for the recommendation that the staff made at the last FOMC meeting to taper the pace of purchases gradually as the programs come to an end. For this meeting, we provided a memo with more details about potential paths for the purchases of MBS and agency debt. The strategy highlighted in the memo is to taper MBS purchases beginning soon after the current FOMC meeting, with the intention of finishing the purchases by the end of the first quarter. One potential path under this strategy is shown by the light blue line in the middle left panel.  This approach would give the market time to adjust to the declining presence of the Fed and to allow new purchasers of MBS to crowd in 
and replace the Fed, which might smooth any interest rate response associated with that process. Another potential benefit is that it would allow the Desk to start letting up on the gas pedal immediately, which could help to address any strains on market functioning arising from our current pace of purchases, although our impression is that market liquidity over the past month or two has been decent even at our current rate of purchases. The FOMC could consider an even longer tapering period that lasts through the second quarter, as shown by the red line. However, this would involve a steeper drop in purchases today, which would risk prompting some backup in mortgage rates in the near-term.  The Desk does not believe that the longer tapering period is needed for facilitating the market adjustment or for ensuring market liquidity.  Hence, any decision to move in this direction should be based on other considerations, such as the optimal amount and timing of the stimulus that policymakers desire. The memo also made a recommendation for tapering agency debt purchases.  The green line in the panel to the right shows that the pace of agency purchases would have to pick up considerably to reach the $200 billion limit by year-end.  The current pace of purchases is already causing some strain on market functioning, so such an increase is not advised. An extension of the program through the first quarter would allow the Desk to get to the $200 billion limit (the red line), though the amount of tapering would be limited under that approach.  Alternatively, the Desk could aim to reach $175 billion of purchases through the first quarter, which would allow a decent amount of tapering (the blue line).  One possibility is to allow the purchases to end up somewhere between $175 and $200 billion, depending on how market conditions evolve. The market effects of an announcement on tapering will also depend on whether market participants make any inference about changes to the total size of the programs.  In particular, there is some risk that the announcement of a slowdown in 
         the pace of purchases could be interpreted as a sign that the total size of the program is being reduced. This risk may be particularly acute when the program size provides flexibility in that direction, as is currently the case with the up to language.  When the tapering of Treasury purchases was announced, the FOMC decided to drop the up to portion of the targeted amount, which provided the markets with clarity about the total size of the program and avoided this risk. As shown in the bottom panels, our dealer survey suggests that market participants expect the Federal Reserve to reach the full $1.25 trillion limit for MBS purchases. That view is consistent with what the Desk has heard in conversations with a broad set of traders and market analysts.  The survey also indicates that agency debt purchases are expected to reach the full $200 billion limit, although discussions 
with traders indicate that this view is not held as uniformly or with as much conviction. In both cases, respondents expected purchases to continue into the first quarter. The ongoing purchases of securities have now begun to outpace the decline in balances at the Feds liquidity facilities, as shown in the upper left panel on the last 
page, causing the size of the Feds total balance sheet to drift higher.  We expect this trend to continue, with the balance sheet projected to grow from its current level of $2.1 trillion to a peak of $2.4 trillion by June 2010.  This process will continue to add reserves to the banking system.  In addition, the drawdown of the Treasurys SFP balances from $200 billion to $15 billion over the next six weeks will boost the amount of reserves even further.  Overall, based on these developments, the level of excess reserves is likely to increase from its average of around $850 billion in the current maintenance period to nearly $1.2 trillion by the end of the year. I will conclude my briefing by describing recent developments in short-term funding markets and the associated effects on lending through our shorter-term liquidity facilities.  The rates at which some of the largest financial institutions can 
obtain unsecured credit have fallen impressively, as indicated by the LIBOROIS spreads shown in the upper right panel. The spread for the three-month maturity point has dropped all the way to 12 basis pointsa level that was seen as normal ahead of the financial crisis. This improvement reflects greater confidence in the soundness of the financial system, a greater willingness to extend credit, and a gradual reduction in borrowers demand for funds.  For similar reasons, the market for borrowing by nonfinancial firms has also improved, as shown in the middle left 
by the tight spreads on commercial paper.  However, while some firms face few funding constraints, others reportedly have much less access to the market.  Indeed, even in the LIBOR panel, there remains some degree of tiering in the pricing of credit across borrowers, and anecdotal 
evidence suggests that such tiering is much more extensive for financial firms outside the LIBOR panel. In terms of secured financing, the repo market is generally functioning well.  
            Repo volumes have stabilized after the steep decline that began late last year, and bidasked spreads on many types of transactions have improved considerably from the high levels reached during the crisis.  However, there is now much more differentiation across types of collateral.  As shown in the middle right panel, haircuts in the repo market widened sharply for lower-quality collateral during the crisis and have remained very disperse.  This type of differentiation is expected to persist to 
some degree. Overall, the financial crisis has caused some lasting changes to the way short-term funding markets operate, with greater differentiation across both borrowers and types of collateral. Nevertheless, market participants seem to have adjusted to these changes, and access to short-term funding has been improving for many borrowers. This improvement has been sufficient to reduce the usage of the Feds liquidity facilities by market participants, as most facilities were priced to be attractive during periods of financial stress but uneconomical during normal periods.  The amount of credit provided by these facilities, shown in the bottom left, has shrunk dramatically from over $1.5 trillion early this year to less than $350 billion todaya decline that has spanned all of the facilities.  This decline indicates that the automatic exit strategy that was built into the design of these facilities has worked well. It is important to note, however, that these volumes might not be on a simple glide path to zero. The table to the right shows the number of firms that remain in the facilities, as well as the number of borrowers that have continuously relied on the facilities since June.  The Fed is likely to face an adverse selection problem in which firms with limited outside financing options prove the most challenging to push out of the facilities. Federal Reserve staff has begun to engage those firms remaining in each facility in discussions about their plans for exiting the program in order to ensure the least disruptive transition from these facilities once they expire. That concludes my prepared remarks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Questions for Brian? Governor Tarullo.  MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, as you were discussing panels 27 and 28, you made reference to some lasting changes in some of the credit markets.  Can you specify a bit which you expect to be lasting and which you expect to continue to improve? MR. SACK. I can. Theres a lot of focus on the LIBOROIS spread, which seems to give the impression that the market has completely returned to previous practices.  I wanted to 
  present some evidence suggesting that thats not the case, but rather that the market does look different today from the way it looked several years ago.  In particular, as I said in the remarks, theres just much more differentiation across types of collateral and, to some degree, across types of borrowers. Those are lasting changes, not only in that they have persisted to today, but also in that we expect them to persist, at least to some degree, indefinitely, as the market moves towards more reasonable pricing and a more reasonable structure going forward.  It makes sense.  There certainly should be a good deal of differentiation across different types of collateral.  For example, some of the collateral listed in this chart is riskierits harder to put a price on it, so you dont know the value of the collateral, so, certainly, the idea that the market would require a haircut for that kind of collateral seems reasonable. That was the point. We see those changes as likely to persist, to some degree at least, going forward. MR. TARULLO. Theyre not so much structural changes, thoughyoure anticipating that, as things continue to normalize, there wont be some sort of a reversion to the way things were before the crisis? MR. SACK. Correct. But I think theres a possibility that well see structural changes as well. For example, a working group has been formed to look at the triparty repo market and some of the credit issues that arose in that market during the crisis. In the end, depending on what the solutions are, structural change could also affect pricing in these markets. MR. TARULLO. Okay. Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Brian, my question is just out of curiosity about something Ive heard you say a couple of times.  Why do dealers have different opinions on the Feds likely follow-through on our purchases of agency MBS versus the agency debt? I have read 
 commentaries and weve taken questions on whether or not well follow through on MBS, but I havent heard the same about the agency debt.   MR. SACK. I think theres less conviction that well follow through to the full limit on the agencies, and thats primarily because theres a recognition by market participants that the pace of purchases is causing some strain in the market.  And its also because the pace of purchases is not sufficient to get us to the $200 billion limit by the end of the year.  You can see that in chart 22wed need a pretty sharp increase in the pace of purchases to get to the mandated total.  So I think the inference that investors have drawn is that the Committee is less committed to getting to that total on the agency debt side than it is on the MBS side. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Id like to follow up on that, Brian, and anticipate, perhaps, a bit of tomorrows discussion.  Looking at these spreads and where the market is heading, what is the likely reaction to our saying that, instead of going to $1 trillion we are going to $1 trillion for the MBS purchases, and were going to taper it so we end this at the end of the year, anticipating that the economy is recovering and therefore we have to begin to think about our exit strategy.  I know a bit of uncertainty about this may be out there, and Id like to get your sense of how much turmoil was circulating around that possibility and what the effect would be. MR. SACK. At this point, I think that outcome would likely prompt some backup in MBS rates. Its difficult to gauge the magnitude of that increase, but it wouldnt be surprising if it were on the order of, say, 15 to 30 basis points, something like that.  In the past, the staff has looked at a variety of evidence and used rules of thumb suggesting that something like $100 billion of a surprisein any purchase programcould be worth something like 6 to 10 basis points on ten-year yields. So that estimate would be consistent with those metrics.  I 
  think its important to realize that market participants see a sizable effect today.  They seem to have a pretty strong conviction that the program will go all the way to $1.25 trillion.  So those two things mean that that announcement would be a surprise. MR. HOENIG. Given those basis points, and given the fact that you would have, then, time following that, are we talking about a bad thing, necessarily, given where the market is and that were in the process of shifting away from our having such a dominant role? In other words, do you think that the action would be disruptive to the economy more broadly in terms of its effect on the market?  Now, if it lasted, that would be one thing, but if it were temporary, that would be another thing, given that the market may begin to work again. MR. SACK. I think it wouldnt necessarily be disruptive to the market, at least in any sustained sense. Obviously, it would be a surprise upon announcement.  There would be some adjustment, but presumably the market would reprice and begin to function just fine.  I think the broader question of whether its a good thing is an issue for the FOMC.  It would mean a higher cost of housing and, obviously, the associated effects on the strength of the economy. MR. HOENIG. Fair enough. Thank you very much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just want to amplify on Brians answer.  First, I think the effect would be 15 to 30 basis points at a minimum, because by the end of this week were going to have done about $895 billion of agency MBS purchases. So to cap it at a trillion means 
you are only doing $105 billion as opposed to $355 billion.  So its a pretty sizable discrete difference. Second, the market would take it as an independent signal about how concerned or unconcerned the Fed was with the economic outlook.  They probably would also pull forward the timing of Fed tightening.  So thered probably be a separate channel in terms of the effects on 
      yields. I think Brians 15 to 30 basis points is conservative, if you add those two effects together. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that match up? The dealers thoughtwhat was it, about 50 or 60 basis points from the end of the program? MR. SACK. They see the effect today as 60 basis points. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Youre pretty close to ending it if you only have $105 billion to go. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Are you talking about spreads or yields? And how would it affect the Treasury market? MR. SACK. I was talking about yields. The dealer survey question is about yields.  Its true that we look at spreads, as indicated in the chart in the briefing.  We look at spreads as a useful measure to look for those effects, but I think ultimately we care about the effects on 
yields. So we were careful to phrase the dealer question to be about yields and not spreads.  I think you would assume some of that effect passes through to Treasuries, but, obviously, not one 
for one. MR. LACKER. But wouldnt the Treasury view this as the Treasury marketdamp the effect on yields, right?  I mean, if the spreads dont move as much. MR. SACK. Were talking about an effect on MBS yields.  So whether its 15 to 30 basis points or up to 60 basis points, were talking about the effect on MBS rates.  I would expect some portion of that to pass through to Treasury yields and to yields more broadly. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  Let me just recognize you, President Bullard. But lets not get completely into the debate at this point.  [Laughter] Were still in Q&A mode.  President Bullard? MR. BULLARD. I just want to understand exhibit 4 and number 19, the MBS option-adjusted spread. You cited this figure as evidence that there was an effect on the purchase program, and I just want to understand how we should think of this.  If you look at the left part of the graphfrom August 2000 to August 2003that would be a period of recession and very slow economic growth following the recession, and the spread fell maybe 80 basis points, just eyeballing it. In the current episode, youve got a much more severe recession, and the spread fell maybe 100 basis points.  There was no asset-purchase program in the earlier period, and, if we control for recession effects, maybe there wouldnt be very big effects from the asset-purchase program. Or do we not want to interpret it that way? MR. SACK. When we modeled MBS spreadsand weve used a variety of models some of them included other credit spreads.  There does seem to be some co-movement between MBS spreads and other credit spreads.  I think that was probably the case in that earlier period, and, obviously, we see this pattern of widening into the crisis and then improving in other markets as well.  I think the difference is that the improvement in the MBS spread has been so sharp and has corresponded so strongly with the purchase programs that we dont think this narrowing just reflects some improvement in credit and some cyclical effect.  We think it goes 
well beyond that. Having said that, I would like to say it is hard to determine how far beyond some sustainable level the spreads are.  Here, Im showing a measure relative to Treasuries.  This spread is negative. That looks anomalous by historical standards, so you could look at this chart 
 and eyeball it and say, Well, maybe the spread is 50 basis points below whats sustainable.  But if we measure it relative to swap rates, it doesnt look quite as extreme.  I would say relative to swap rates it looks like MBS are maybe 25 basis points beyond fundamentals. Our general conclusion is that we believe the purchases have had a very large effect on the spreads. Starting from a disrupted market, I think its very fair to conclude that the purchases have collapsed those spreads more than 100 basis points.  The harder question is: Have they collapsed them to normal or through normal, and, if through normal, how far? Based on the range of models were estimating trying to answer this question, something like 25 to 50 basis points looks like a reasonable guess. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-hander, President Lacker? MR. LACKER. No, it was a one-hander, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One-hander, okay. [Laughter] Well go one-hander to President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Well, if you want to continue on the mortgage-backed securities, mine is on another subject, so perhaps President Lacker would like to go.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im sorry.  Okay. President Plosser, yes. 
MR. PLOSSER. Two-hander. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Two-hander, okay. 
MR. PLOSSER. Id like to go back to this estimate of the effects of cutting back purchases from $1 trillion to $1 trillion. Im looking at exhibit 4, chart 20.  The effect on yields is somewherelets just take a modal numberbetween 50 and 75 basis points.  I thought the argument had been that it is the stock that matters, not flow so much.  If we cut from $1 trillion to $1 trillion, thats one-fifth of the total stock.  If you do a back-of-the-envelope calculation 
   divide 75 basis points by fivethat would suggest somewhere between 10 and 15 basis points, not somewhere between 25 and 50 basis points.  So Im not quite sure I understand the argument that by cutting the program by one-fifth were going to take away as much as half or three-quarters of the basis point cut that the dealers seem to think there has been. Could you clarify that for me? MR. SACK. Well, there is a range of interpretations.  Lets say we assume half the effect comes through stock, and half the effect comes through flow.  In this case, if the total effect is 50 to 75 that means, say, we have 35 and 35.  Youre right about the stock effect not changing dramatically.  The expected stock effect is shifting, but if we take your one-fifth, were talking maybe 10 basis points, max.  But, of course, the flow effect is going to diminish as well. When we look at these responses, 50 to 75 basis points, and at how these respondents answered about how the effects would evolve going forward, they essentially almost uniformly assume that the effect would diminish from now to six months after the conclusion of the purchases. So, implicitly, they were putting a lot of weight on flow effects in those responses.  We didnt push too hard on that because its a small number of responses.  We didnt really dig into it very much and follow up with them on why they had so much reversal.  But I think when we look at the dealer survey as a whole, it suggests that flow effects are a big part of this. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Would you like to finish? MR. SACK. No, thats okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, this is sort of a statement disguised as a question, but I would still like to get your reaction, Brian. It has nothing to do with mortgage-backed securities, which I realize is the focus of a lot of this meeting.  It goes back to your first graph on equity 
prices. We have hadgoing back to 1923, 192415 recessions before the current one.  According to the data, if my memory serves correctly, from the trough of the equity market as measured by the S&P 500 or its equivalent, to when we emerge from recession, the average rally has been about 22 percent.  Looking at chart 1, if you assume that we exited the recession in 
July, roughly, we have had the most significant equity market rally in history; this even outperforms 1929 to 1933. I am continually troubled by the issue of top-line versus margin enhancement and bottom-line growth.  I ask this question because I think it is very important.  We make almost a linear assumption in our baseline case of pretty positive equity market numbers going forward, 
after having had what is, historically speaking, the greatest stock market rally coming out of a recession in history. That is around 48 percent.  Now, from your standpoint as a market operator, or as someone who is more attuned to the markets than certainly I am, and I think the rest of us are, can you continue this process without top-line growth? Im just curious as to what your concerns are, if you have them, because, again, the baseline growth model that we have factors in some pretty healthy equity market numbers going forward.  So Im just curious from a Desk standpoint what your feelings are about this.  And I realize this is guessworkbut still. MR. SACK. Well, I think weve had a very sharp rally reflecting the size of the revision to the economic outlook and the very substantial shift in the perceived risks around that outlook.  So, yes, it is big by historical standards, but there is a very extreme update to the outlook among market participants.  The question is: Going forward, can you sustain that pace?  The answer is:  Definitely no. Going forward, the equity market gains are going to be governed by changes in earnings revenue and by changes in the valuation or the equity premium that was shown in the chart. On the earnings revenue side, earnings have been good, but a lot of that good news has 
   come from cost-cutting.  We dont have a lot of top-line GDP growth, so it will be hard to produce a robust enough earnings environment, given the GDP forecast, for that to be the engine of ongoing substantial equity market gains.  I think a bigger question is the equity premium that I showed in the bottom left panel.  There we have scope for further narrowing, so that could be one source of ongoing gains. But, as you can see, weve already narrowed a good amount, so even there were kind of losing capacity. But keep in mind that were going up very rapidly.  We had a 7 percent gain this intermeeting period, and for a while I was describing that as underperformance relative to the previous intermeeting periods.  So I think, of course, this can level out.  My main point was not that we should expect to sustain these increases, but that these increases have not necessarily set us up for some kind of a reversal, because the increases have not pushed valuations beyond what looked reasonable under some models.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you. When you announce individual auctions that you hold to buy Treasuries or MBS or agency debt, you dont announce the amount, do you? MR. SACK. Thats correct. MR. LACKER. With regard to the total program, we talked about the value of clarity.  I was wondering why you dont announce the amounts when you do individual auctions, 
especially if theres a flow effect. MR. SACK. We try to retain some flexibility for varying the flow of purchases in response to market conditions and in response to the kinds of offers that we receive.  Thats the main answer.  I think it would be problematic if the market had no sense of what our pace of 
  purchases was going to be, or what kind of target we were trying to get to.  But they know all of that, so we just afford ourselves some ability to vary over time in response to market conditions. We do exercise discretion in terms of how much to push the markets on any given day, especially in the MBS program and in the agency debt program.  We will have a target for purchasing, currently around $25 billion a week for MBS, but what we actually realize in a given week depends on the market conditions that we see and how much we seem able to buy without causing problems in market functioning.  So the main answer is that we dont commit to a schedule of purchase amounts, because we want to retain that flexibility. MR. LACKER. Okay. It sounds like the value of flexibility to you exceeds the value that providing clarity to market participants on that day would provide. I have another question, if I could, Mr. Chairman.  Brian mentioned strains in the agency debt market.  I would be interested in learning a little more about sort of what observationally that looks like. MR. SACK. First, let me just clarify one thing.  We dont announce in advance paths for the size of MBS purchases. When we do Treasury operations, we do announce the size the day before the operation is conducted. MR. LACKER. For Treasuries. MR. SACK. But we dont pre-commit to the sizethats what I meant.  In the agency market, a lot of the feedback is anecdotal.  We look at trading volumes, we look at bidasked 
spreads, but we also rely a lot on discussions with market participants.  And we see a number of things. For example, for a time we werent buying on-the-run issues.  We were only buying off-the-run issues. And what we saw was actually a reverse on-the-run premium develop, in the sense that the on-the-run yields were actually higher than all of the off-the-run yields.   
                                                      So we certainly look at this market and say, Well, our purchases are really pushing prices a lot. They are taking a lot of the floating supply in the market.  And we hear back from dealers that they are affecting dealers willingness to short issues out of fear that there is not enough floating supply to cover those positions.  So we look at a variety of evidence. This isnt too controversial. We are very big in that market.  I think in the last briefing I indicated that our purchases were something like ten times the net issuance in the agency sector that we expected over the program.  So we are very big relative to issuance and the size of that market, and its quite clear that thats causing some problems for marketing functioning. MR. LACKER. Do you think the market is better off with our intervention? Do you think were accomplishing other things that outweigh the detrimental effect of these strains? MR. SACK. For the Treasury purchases and the MBS purchases, I would say the answer is yes, I think weve had a substantial effect on market interest rates.  Assuming your objective was to lower market interest rates and simulate economic activity, I think those programs have been very successful. Its less clear how the agency debt purchase program has led to those effects. Obviously, there are indirect channels through affecting the agencies ability to finance themselves and maybe their purchases of mortgages.  But theyre not expanding their balance sheets, so I would say the benefits of that program are less clear to me. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Brian? (No response.) Okay, seeing none, Im going to turn to Bill English, who is going to give the first of three briefings on the balance sheet, reserve management, and associated issues, and then well take questions for all three briefings at the same time.  Bill. MR. ENGLISH.2  Thank you very much.  Ill be referring to the handout FOMC Briefing on the Implications of Higher Reserve Balances.  As shown in the top left panel of your first exhibit, the aggregate stock of reserve balances has increased from2 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
         about $20 billion prior to the onset of the financial crisis to about $850 billion recently, and it is projected to peak at about $1.2 trillion during the first half of next year before gradually trending lower. This very high level of reserves raises two potential concerns, noted to the right.  First, high levels of reserve balances could, by increasing banks assets, put downward pressure on their regulatory leverage ratios, leading them to pull back further from lending or cut purchases of securities, with adverse consequences for the economy.  Second, and conversely, as the economy improves and banks become more comfortable with their capital and liquidity positions, they could try to take steps to reduce their reserve balances.  Because the banking system as a whole cannot reduce reserve balances all that much, banks 
efforts to do so could put downward pressure on some interest rates and boost bank lending. The result could be an increase in monetary stimulus at a time when the economy may already be expanding briskly and inflation could be at or above its desired level. As noted in the middle left panel, the first of these concerns was the subject of a staff memorandum and briefing at your June meeting.  The staffs assessment at that time was that banks appeared to have sufficient capital to absorb the projected increase in reserve balances without putting undue pressure on their leverage ratios. Since that time, the staff has marked down substantially the anticipated increase in 
reserve balances, reflecting unexpectedly large paydowns of Federal Reserve lending programs, a smaller assumed size of the TALF program, and the more gradual pace of MBS purchases now projected. This revision reinforces the results presented by the staff in June. But, I should note that we do not know how large a capital buffer individual banking organizations want to maintain over regulatory norms, so its possible that elevated levels of reserves could yet constrain some banks activities.   As noted to the right, to obtain further information on the second concern, staff consulted four banking organizations over the intermeeting period, including two large U.S. commercial banks, one key processing bank, and one large U.S. branch of a foreign banking organization. These four institutions currently account for 35 percent of aggregate reserve balances and 17 percent of total bank credit.  Of course, this is a small sample, and the institutions are not typical of the broader 
banking universe. These firms were chosen because they represent a range of institution types and because their reserve balances are very high, suggesting that their plans could shed considerable light on the demand for reserve balances going forward. The consultations covered three broad areas of balance sheet management:  The reasons for the firms current high reserve balances, their possible responses to further increases in reserve balances, and their intentions regarding an eventual return to lower levels of balances. The most notable reasons the banking organizations provided for their own elevated balances are listed in the bottom left panel.  All of the institutions pointed to 
substantial inflows of funds last fall, following the failure of Lehman Brothers and the strains in the money market mutual fund sector.  Three institutions also indicated that risk-adjusted returns on alternative assets were not attractive, and that loan demand 
       has been weak. In addition, the large commercial banks noted a desire to hold high balances as a liquidity buffer against the possibility that conditions in funding markets might deteriorate again.   As noted to the right, we next asked how the institutions might respond to a further inflow of reserve balances to their institutions.  The large commercial banks 
indicated that their balances could rise somewhat further before they would take actions to reduce them.  By contrast, the processing bank and the foreign branch both 
reported that they would take steps to offset any addition to their reserve balances. The institutions generally reported that the actions they would take to offset an increase in reserves would include running off some managed liabilities and purchasing safe short- and intermediate-term securities.  The banking organizations pointed specifically to Treasury and agency obligations and other sovereign and sovereign-guaranteed securities, such as FDIC-guaranteed bank bonds.  None of the banks suggested that they would increase their lending to reduce reserve balances in this situation.   The top left panel of your next exhibit summarizes the four banking organizations plans for reducing their reserve balances over time.  Each firm expected that these reductions would leave the desired level of balances well above pre-crisis levels, reflecting, particularly for the processing bank and the foreign branch, the impact of the payment of interest on reserves, and for the two large commercial banks, a general increase in concern about access to liquidity during periods of stress. The four institutions suggested very different timing for their anticipated reductions in reserve balances. The processing bank noted that it had already begun trimming its balances, and it planned to complete its adjustment by the end of the year. One of the two large commercial banks planned to make its adjustment next year and the other in 2011. The foreign branch suggested that there likely could be 
no significant reduction in its reserve holdings until the Federal Reserve began cutting the aggregate supply of reserves. It explained that its balances were primarily determined by volatile flows of short-term funds from its customers, and it had little ability to influence such flows without disrupting existing customer relationships.   When they felt the time had come to begin reducing their reserve holdings, the banking organizations planned to make adjustments to both the asset and liability sides of their balance sheets, as listed to the right.  On the liability side, they planned to pay down their borrowings in wholesale funding markets and allow some large time deposits to run off.  On the asset side, they would increase lending in interbank and other wholesale markets and increase purchases of safe short- and intermediate-term securities.  Only one of the institutions said that it might ease its credit terms to boost lending, and none reported an intention to ease credit standards.     As noted in the middle left panel, there is some tension between our projected increases in reserve balances and the banks stated expectation that their demand for 
   such holdings will fall over coming years.  Individual banks are likely to take actions to reduce their reserves, but, as I noted earlier, they cannot, in aggregate, reduce the stock of reserve balances all that much.  Thus, the main result of the banks efforts is likely to be changes in the returns on various assets and liabilities that leave the banking sector content to hold the existing stock of reserve balances.  In particular, rates on shorter-term funding instruments are likely to fall relative to the rate paid on reserve balances, while yields on securities that are viewed as relatively close substitutes for reservesparticularly short- and intermediate-term Treasury and agency securitiesshould decline somewhat from their already low levels.  These changes will then be arbitraged into the yields on other assets as well.  By contrast, the consultations suggest that banks are unlikely to ease their lending standards significantly in order to boost loan growth.  Nonetheless, as the economy recovers, the demand for loans from creditworthy firms and households will presumably pick 
up, and risk spreads may well narrow as the outlook improves.  The result is likely to be a recovery and expansion in loans at banks that largely stems from factors other than reductions in desired reserves holdings.   As noted to the right, these potential effects of very high reserve balances are the expected consequences of quantitative easing.  However, the size of such effects on interest rates and the aggregate economy is quite uncertain.  Evidence from the Japanese experience suggests that they may be fairly small.  Rates on interbank deposits and short-term securities are already quite lowindeed, bill rates are below the rate paid on reserve balancesand so are not likely to fall all that much further, given that we are at present operating so close to the zero bound.  Moreover, these effects may emerge only gradually as institutions decide on a bank-by-bank basis to 
reduce their reserves demand.  In addition, some banks actions may be constrained by capital concerns.  For these reasons, in the staff forecast the effects of elevated reserve balances are implicitly assumed to be quite small (though I should note that in the staff forecast the direct effects of the Federal Reserves purchases of Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities on long-term yields are estimated to be large). To provide some background for the Committee regarding the possible macroeconomic impact of elevated reserve balances going forward, my colleagues in Research and Statistics and I constructed an alternative scenario using the FRB/US model. We started by assuming that the effects of elevated reserve balances on short- and intermediate-term interest rates are quite largemuch larger than we believe is likely to be the caseand occur at the start of 2010.  In particular, we assume a decline of 50 basis points relative to the baseline in interest rates at maturities of one to five years, accompanied by a downtick in longer-term interest rates, a modest decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and a small rise in stock prices.  Importantly, however, we assume that banks make no changes to their lending 
standards and terms.  The lower interest rates boost household spending on durables, business spending on equipment and software, and housing investment through mortgage rates (primarily on ARMs), while the lower value of the dollar raises net exports. Adding up the pieces, as shown in the bottom left panel, the effect is to 
        increase GDP growth by about 0.3 percentage point in 2010 and 0.4 percentage point in 2011, cut the unemployment rate by 0.3 percentage point by the end of 2011, and raise inflation just a bit.  While these effects, which we believe are likely a significant overstatement, are not negligible, they do not greatly change the general contour of the staff forecast. Of course, it is possible that this assessment of the effects of very high reserve balances is wrongwere in a new worldand that the result will be a larger dose of monetary stimulus next year, as noted in the bottom right panel.  For example, banks 
may prove far more willing to ease credit standards and terms than suggested by our 
consultations.  However, some FOMC participants may see additional stimulus as 
potentially beneficial.  In the staff forecast, the economic recovery is gradual, unemployment remains high through 2011, and inflation remains low.  Thus, some additional stimulus might be helpful in fostering economic conditions that are more consistent with your dual objectives.  On the other hand, very high reserve balances could undercut confidence in the Federal Reserves ability to maintain price stability, contributing to higher expected and actual inflation.  If very high reserve balances provide undesired stimulus or appear to be significantly boosting inflation expectations, then the Committee could choose to tighten policy sooner or more rapidly than it would have otherwise.  Jim Clouse will now update you on the work being done to prepare the tools that might be employed in doing so.   MR. CLOUSE. Thanks, Bill. The staff has continued to develop reserve management toolsincluding term reverse RPs, a term deposit facility, and reserve collateral accounts that, along with adjustments to the interest rate on excess reserves, should allow the 
Committee to raise the federal funds rate when it wishes to do so.   As discussed at the August meeting, the Desk could drain reserves by conducting term reverse RPs with primary dealers or other counterparties.  The Desk will be prepared to conduct reverse repos on a sizable scale as early as a month from now, using Treasury and agency collateral and with primary dealers as counterparties.  Staff is also working on two significant expansions of this basic program:  the ability to do reverses against agency MBS and the inclusion of counterparties beyond the primary dealers. The informal consultations with four financial institutions that Bill described, along with the Desks conversations with primary dealers, indicate that there is considerable interest among dealers in participating in a term reverse RP program.  However, the primary dealers note that their participation in the program would be limited by balance sheet constraints.  To some extent, such balance sheet concerns reportedly are connected with regulatory capital requirements.  While the SECs regulatory net capital charges for dealers explicitly exclude transactions with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, regulatory leverage ratios may be an issue for those dealers that are part of bank holding companies.  For these institutions, the financing of collateral reversed in from the Federal Reserve could have an appreciable impact on their leverage ratios at the consolidated bank holding company level. 
      Dealers have noted that in many cases balance sheet constraints also stem very importantly from internal guidelines regarding leverage; in part, such internal guidelines are based on the attention devoted to leverage in the analyses of credit rating agencies and other outside analysts. Staff continues to investigate ways to mitigate such concerns about balance sheet capacity. One avenue currently being explored is the potential for the Federal Reserve to participate in the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, a step that might allow for netting of primary dealers matched book repo transactions with the Federal Reserve and thereby avoid large increases in the size of their balance sheets. Based on conversations with about half of the dealer community and the staff consultations with banking organizations, staff estimates suggest that the primary dealers in aggregate could take on $100 billion to $200 billion or so of reverse RPs.  The apparent capacity constraint among primary dealers in conducting large-scale operations in reverse RPs puts a premium on expanding the list of counterparties beyond primary dealers.  Primary dealers have been informed that additional counterparties may be needed for an effective implementation of this program.  Work on this front is slated to start soon. The Desk has made substantial progress in laying the operational groundwork for a reverse RP program, including contract negotiations, the development of automated systems, and settlement processes.  Concerning contracts, the legal documentation to support triparty reverse repos is expected to be executed by the primary dealers and clearing banks later this month. The Desk has also negotiated agreements with the triparty banks on service levels and the general fee structure for triparty reverses.  This agreement is also expected to be finalized in the coming days.  Regarding automation and settlement, the Desk has tested the existing FedTrade system for use in conducting triparty reverse RPs.  The Desk is in the final stages of preparing for implementation and should be ready to perform end-to-end testing with primary dealers, clearing banks, and settlement systems in early October.  The basic version of the reverse RP programtriparty reverse RPs with primary dealers against Treasury and agency securitieswill be ready to go by the end of next month.  Work to expand the range of collateral and counterparties is ongoing and should be completed later this year. Turning to the term deposit facility, the staff consultations with four banking organizations suggested that they could well be interested in participating in a term deposit program.  We do not yet have a reading on small banks interest.  The amounts that institutions would be willing to shift from reserve balances into term deposits would depend on various factors, including the maturities offered and the interest rate paid on term deposits, particularly relative to the rate earned on excess reserves.  The banks in our informal consultations indicated that they would want to hold more term deposits if there were some means by which such deposits could be utilized to meet an unusual liquidity demand, perhaps through an early withdrawal option or by allowing term deposits to serve as collateral at the discount window. A staff steering group has been established to oversee four work streams associated with the term deposit facilityprogram design, legal documentation, governance, and implementation. 
  
 
                                                        3 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). The design team is studying various aspects of posted-rate term deposit facilities, including appropriate pricing and maturity structures, and it is also considering the set of rules that should apply if the System elects to issue term deposits via an auction.  System legal staff is examining the legal basis for establishing term deposit accounts and is also considering the agreements between Reserve Banks and depository institutions necessary to support term deposit accounts.  The staff has also begun to discuss governance issues raised by both the posted-rate and auction-rate approaches.  The key issue is ensuring that rates and quantities would be set in a way that ensures appropriate input from all Federal Reserve stakeholders. The implementation group has, for some time, been developing and testing the computer code necessary to support a term deposit program.  Using this code, DIs we to submit tenders through a web-based application.  This new code will be deployed at the end of next month and can be activated when the facility is ready to be implemented.  As noted in the August briefing, some lead time will be required to implement a term deposit facility, because DIs would have to request and receive electronic certificates to access the application.  Our expectation is that about one month of lead time would be required to have several thousand depositories positioned to participate.      As discussed at the August meeting, reserve collateral accounts, or RCAs, would be new Federal Reserve deposit accounts designed to facilitate trading of fed funds on a collateralized basis. By reducing counterparty credit risk concerns, these new accounts might well enable sellers who utilize the accounts to obtain higher bids for the fed funds they sell.  The staff has surveyed two GSEs about their interest in using RCAs.  Both are examining the option, and their internal staffs are reviewing the RCA as a new product.  They will share the outcome of those internal reviews with Federal Reserve staff in the near future.  The reviews are expected to yield a fairly rich set of information on those GSEs likely use of RCAs.  RCAs are entirely new, and the staff is still in a relatively early stage of analysis for these accounts. We are waiting to hear back from the GSEs before determining whether to establish a steering group to oversee future work in this area.  Internally, the RCA concept has been discussed with the Systems Accounting Management Steering Group (AMSG).  The AMSG viewed the concept as feasible and similar in some respects to the recent implementation of excess balance accounts.  In addition, members of the Committee on Reserve Administration have reviewed the proposal.  Brian will now continue the staff  presentations. MR. MADIGAN.3 Thank you. Ill be referring to the handout labeled Material for Briefing on Proposed TAF and TSLF Schedules.  As noted in Brian Sacks briefing, conditions in short-term funding markets have improved somewhat further 
        over the intermeeting period.  As a result, the relative attractiveness of the Federal Reserves lending facilities has declined, given the penalty-rate pricing of most of those programs, and so usage of the facilities has continued to diminish.  However, the Federal Reserve still needs to make explicit decisions about the amounts of credit offered under the two main auction-based liquidity programs, the TAF and the TSLF.  As announced on June 25, the Federal Reserve has suspended schedule 1 TSLF and TSLF Option Program operations and has reduced the size and frequency of TSLF schedule 2 operations to one offering of $75 billion per month.  The Federal Reserve 
also has reduced the offered amounts under the TAF in three steps so far, from a peak of $150 billion per auction to $75 billion per auction in September.  Those reductions in TAF auctions have been determined and announced one month at a time, based on observation of auction results and assessments of market conditions. However, the staff believes that it would be desirable at this stage to formulate and publish plans for the auction schedules and amounts to be offered over the period through January. These plans would incorporate a further reduction in liquidity support over that period while still providing assurance to market participants that the Federal Reserve will provide sufficient liquidity over year-end.  By making its plans explicit, the Federal Reserve would help reduce market uncertainty and would provide market participants with sufficient time to arrange other sources of short-term funding. The announced schedules should be designed to mesh with the Federal Reserves overall plans for winding down its liquidity programs.  As you know, most Federal Reserve liquidity programs are set to expire on February 1.  However, the TAF does not have a fixed expiration date. Indeed, when the TAF was first announced in December 2007, the Federal Reserve suggested that consideration would be given to making the facility permanent and indicated that public comment would be obtained before any decision was made regarding the establishment of a permanent facility. The staff recommends initiating soon the process of seeking public comment on a proposal for a permanent TAF.  Subject to your comments and approval by the Board, we would describe several possible TAF structures in the request for public comment.  Those possible structures could range from a deactivated facility that was on the shelf but ready for use if circumstances warranted to regular TAF auctions of a substantial volume of funds.  Several intermediate alternatives could also be described.  The notice would probably be published for a forty-five- or sixty-day public comment period. The staff anticipates that the Board would also seek input from Reserve Bank Boards of Directors. Based on the comments received, the Board would decide late this year or early next year whether to establish a permanent TAF. Regardless of whether the TAF will become permanent, the near-term path of TAF operations has to be decided. The staff has developed proposed schedules for TAF and TSLF auctions for the next four months; they are shown on the last page of the package. Both of these schedules involve considerable reductions in offered amounts into January.  As Ill explain, the TAF schedule could be part of a transition 
       to zero, low, or still sizable auctioned amounts.  The proposed TSLF schedule is designed to allow TSLF auctioned amounts to move down to zero by February, consistent with the current expiration date for that program. As shown in the upper panel, the staff proposes that TAF auctions in the 28-day cycle, the unshaded rows, be held steady at their current level of $75 billion each through mid-January.  The purpose of leaving those auction amounts unchanged for the next few months is to provide substantial assurance of the availability of adequate liquidity over year-end. The current cycle of auctions of 84-day funds, the shaded rows, would be modified in two ways.  First, the terms would be reduced initially to 
70 days and then to 42 days. The purpose of shortening the terms is to align the maturity dates with those of the 28-day auctions.  And, second, the amounts of these longer-term auctions would be reduced from the current level of $75 billion to $25 billion in November, before those auctions are discontinued late this year.  Beginning in December, the System would conduct only one auction per month, for 28-day funds. By mid-January, a maximum of $75 billion of TAF funds would be outstanding; TAF credit outstanding currently stands at just under $200 billion.  Depending on the decision regarding a permanent TAF, that amount could 
subsequently be brought down to zero or phased into the schedule for permanent TAF 
operations. Some policymakers have expressed a view that the minimum bid rate for TAF auctions should be increased from its current level of 25 basis points, equal to the interest rate on excess reserves, in order to provide a penalty for using the facility.  In the staffs view, a significant penalty is inconsistent with an auction facility, and it would be incompatible with the effective operation of a permanent TAF.  And with bid amounts in TAF declining steadily and below amounts being offered in the 
auctions, it is not clear that a penalty rate is currently necessary to discourage usage.  Moreover, once offering amounts are reduced sufficiently, the auction rate should rise above its minimum. The proposed TSLF schedule, shown in the lower panel, specifies that monthly auctions will be reduced in two steps from the current level of $75 billion to 
$25 billion by November.  The offered amount would be held steady at $25 billion in December and January.  The term to maturity of the December 3 operation is planned for 35 days so that the loans do not mature right at the beginning of January.  TSLF operations would cease in early February with the maturation of the January 7 auction, consistent with the facilitys already-announced expiration on February 1. A draft press release is included in your package.  That document sets out the proposed schedules and states that the Federal Reserve will soon request public comment on a permanent TAF.  It also indicates that the Federal Reserve would be prepared to temporarily increase the sizes of TAF and TSLF operations or conduct additional off-cycle operations with terms that span year-end if needed to address transitory market strains. 
      Finally, I should note that we will need to coordinate adjustments to the TAF with possible changes to the swap arrangements with foreign central banks.  Brian Sacks and Nathans staffs will confer with foreign central banks to formulate plans for the eventual elimination of exposures under the current swap arrangements.  A related issue, which we plan to raise for your consideration at the November meeting, 
involves the advisability of establishing a set of permanent swap lines. That concludes the staff presentation. We would be pleased to respond to your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  According to the agenda, the sequence of the meeting goes as follows: First, questions for the staff; there will then be an opportunity for  unstructured interaction on these issues; and then finally, of course, two full go-rounds.  So everyone will have ample opportunity to  express their views on all of these subjects. Lets begin first with just questions for the staff.  Are there questions?  Vice Chairman Dudley. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I had a question for Jim.  Obviously as we contemplate the agency debt and agency MBS purchase programs, the issues are related to our ability to actually have the sort of suspenders in place, in terms of reverse repo or term deposit facilities, to be confident that we can actually do that if we needed to.  The reverse repo instrument, as you described, is a size constraint for the dealers. How confident are you that the reverse repo program  can be successfully introduced to a broader set of counterparties? Highly confident?  Not so confident?  I think the answer to that question is relevant for thinking about our balance sheet size. Also, are there potential legal impediments, or is this just an operational issue? MR. CLOUSE. Ive had a number of conversations with Chris Burke and his colleaguesof course, Brian may want to comment on this as welland I think that the perception is that it will be a challenge to pull in a lot of additional counterparties.  One obvious lending group would be the money funds. You would like to have them participateconceivably, even banks that are holding huge volumes of reserves might want to be lenders of cash against securities.  So there are natural sets of institutions that 
you might want to target, but in order to get them into the system, you have to have legal agreements established with themthat takes some time, I have learned.  And there are also all sorts of operational 
                  difficulties in setting up collateral arrangements and having the monitoring in place.  Theres a perception, at least, that you could get a substantial number of additional counterparties in place by the end of the year, but I think Chris and his colleagues at your Reserve Bank have their work cut out for them. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess what Im asking is, over the longer termyou said nine months from nowcould you drain a trillion dollars of reserves if you had to?  Are you pretty confident you could do that?  At the end of the day, thats really the key question. Actually, there are two questions.  One, do you think interest on excess reserves would be sufficient? I do, but I think other people would have some questions about that.  So then the second question is, to guard against the potential risk of that not being sufficient, what are the suspenders? Then the issue is: Are you highly confident that you could get the suspenders up in operation eventually?  I dont think year-end is necessarily that relevant, but if you told me that you couldnt get it up by midyear 2010, I would start to be nervous. MR. CLOUSE: My own personal view, for what its worth, is that the combination of reverse RPs and the term deposits could be very powerful nine months from now.  The term deposit facility, in particular, could drain a huge amount of reserves; obviously, it depends on the rates that were willing to offer. As for the reverse RPs, I think we could find a very large amount of lenders there, as well.  So I think the combination of those two programs will put us in pretty good shape. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN. My question follows along the same lines; again, its to Jim.  In thinking about the term deposit facility, could we use the term auction facility apparatus to do the term deposit 
facility, because one way of thinking about the term deposit is as a reverse discount window loan, right?  We already have an apparatus that has an auction for loans, so if we were going to use an auction format for deposits instead, it would seem like we already have an apparatus to do it, and it would deal with some of the questions about the permanence of the TAF, if it could go either way during times when we wanted 
                    either to push out a lot of reserves or pull in a lot of reserves. So, when youre thinking about the term deposit facility, are you thinking about it as being something like the term auction facility, or is it a very different structure? MR. CLOUSE.  I think one variation on it would be very much like the term auction facility in structure. The Committee could establish amounts that it wished to auction, take bids, and it would be very much like the TAF, just in reverse.  We probably wouldnt use the existing technology, the program for submitting bids and receiving results and various spreadsheets that have been developed.  Its not the most sophisticated automation, but Sherry Edwards and company have been working for about a year to develop the code in the Statistics and Reserves system to support an auction and to have all of the entries pass through to reserve accounting and to the Federal Reserve Banks accounting systems properly. So I think on that dimension were in very good shape for the term deposit program. MR. ROSENGREN.  Conceptually, that seems much easier than depending on the primary dealer system, if what we wanted to do was pull out a lot of reserves. MR. CLOUSE. I dont like to view them as competing things.  I really view them as kind of complementary, and it could be that both are very useful. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Bill and a related one for Jim, and then a suggestion on the press release. Heres the question for Bill.  You put a lot of emphasis on downward pressure on short-term funding rates as these reserves came into play.  In the good old days, we used to think of the deposit rate as the floor for market rates, because banks would be willing to arbitrage.  I was wondering, as market conditions improved, bank capital increased, and they got more confident, whether they wouldnt be willing to do more arbitrage and put upward pressure on short-term rates. MR. ENGLISH. Bring them up to 25 basis points? MR. KOHN. Up to whatever the deposit rate isright.  I think the answer might beor the problem might bethis leverage ratio.  But I was encouraged by your previous finding that the leverage 
           ratio wouldnt be a problem with the amount of reserves, and I also was encouraged by the response of the banks, namely, that they were putting emphasis on risk-weighted assets rather than on total assets as they thought about their capital ratios.  So I wondered about that counterforce pushing those short-term rates up to the deposit rate. My second point, for Jim, is related to the same thing.  You said that there was a concern about bank capital relative to the reverse RPs, also related to the leverage ratio rather than the risk-weighted assets.  But we did say that the leverage ratio wouldnt be a constraint for reserves.  So it shouldnt bein 
total, anyhowa constraint for some other Federal Reserve liability, that is, reverse RPs.  Now, the difference might be that the reverse RPs were being done with a smaller number of counterparties, so all of the pressure would be on 15 of the largest institutions.  But they probably account for a lot of the assets anyhow. So I wondered whether it was a question of distribution, implying that the leverage ratio wasnt a problem for reserves, but it would be a problem for reverse RPs. My final comment is on the press release.  I dont think it should be commenting on what forms the TAF might take if it became permanent.  The Committee hasnt had a chance to discuss it.  Who knows how this is going to come out?  I think its all right to say well be looking at it, but not suggest 
what it could be. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have three questions.  First, for Mr. English, about the four banking organizations responding that they wouldnt change lending terms.  I assume youre not 
shocked they didnt tell you they would ease credit standards. MR. ENGLISH.  In the last Senior Loan Officer Survey, we asked them when they would move back to more normal standards. MR. LACKER.  On the lending terms, arent a lot of loans priced as a spread over a market rate? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Yes. MR. LACKER.  So if they say they werent going to change lending terms, would you interpret that to mean they wouldnt change the spread? 
       MR. ENGLISH.  Yes. MR. LACKER. So its sort of like a partial equilibrium response, and if other stuff that went on pushed down rates, it could push down lending terms as well. MR. ENGLISH.  It would push down those base rates.  Thats right. 
MR. LACKER.  Right. MR. ENGLISH.  Though Im not sure that youd get a lot of action there, at least on the business side, because one base rate is the primeI dont think its going to be cut much.  The other is three-
month LIBORits already pretty low.  But I agree conceptually. MR. LACKER.  Right. I have a question for Mr. Clouse on these reserve collateral accounts.  When you think about, sort of, a medical intervention, you wouldnt run around and do that on the basis 
of a two-month-old working paper; instead, youd look for peer-reviewed research.  You guys are working hard on implementation.  What are you doing to check the robustness of the theoretical basis for what youre designing this program around? MR. CLOUSE.  Im not sure about the theoretical robustness, but I definitely think the staff shares your basic concerns about whether this would really function in the way the theory might suggest.  
One of the things that the staff has done is to consult with the GSEs to find out whether their view of it would align properly.  I think its also important that we consult with the other side of that transaction, the banks that would be putting these liabilities on their balance sheets, to find out whether they, in fact, would find it attractive, because it really takes both sides of that transaction to make this thing work, and I think its really unclear at this stage.  The staff has more work to do to vet this to be more confident that it could be useful. MR. LACKER. Do you have the results of the GSE conversations yet? MR. CLOUSE.  Not yet, no.  Theyre actually doing a fairly extensive review.  Theyre treating it as a new product, and theyre putting it through a fairly standard process that they would use in analyzing a new product, and theyre going to report those results back to us fairly shortly. So I hope well learn a good bit from those. 
                 MR. LACKER. Did you say theyre putting it through their standard new product evaluation?  [Laughter] And finally, a point about term deposits.  You were talking about some features that would make these pretty liquidtheyd be able to pledge them at the discount window and withdraw them without penalty. If you make these things really accessible, then Im not sure why draining reserves and putting them there would have any effect.  Why would you expect that? Dont you need some stark, sharp, constraining differences in order for them to have any sort of monetary effect? MR. CLOUSE.  Absolutely.  First of all, just the pure operational dimension of having an early withdrawal option for a term deposit is really very difficult.  But, beyond that, to your point, certainly if there were a withdrawal option, youd want to have a pretty stiff penalty associated with it, so that it wouldnt just be relabeling reserves.  It would have to have a fairly clear distinction in order to perform the function thats intended. MR. LACKER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I have a couple of questions for Bill and one for Brian.  One is just a factual question. In your first chart where you talked about the projected level of excess reserves, were you 
including in that the increase in the roughly $200 billion from the end of the SFP program? MR. ENGLISH. I think thats the first peak. MR. PLOSSER. Is that the first peak? MR. ENGLISH.  Yes. 
MR. PLOSSER. Okay.  I just wasnt sure whether it was included.  Second, I was thinking about the story and the analysis that youve done.  At the end, you say, well, okay, what if this analysis is 
wrong?  What would the outcomes be?  My question is how we should think about metrics and variables and things we should be looking at as we go forward during this period of very high reserves to get a handle on which way this story is actually going, because I think theres a lot of uncertainty about how this might, in fact, play out.  How would we structure our ongoing analysis of whats going on out there, 
        so that we would be alert to whether or not the kinds of things that might be the alternative play out? Are there metrics that we should be looking at?  Are there things that we want to monitor carefully to be able to get a handle on that? MR. ENGLISH.  There are, but I think theyre things were already monitoring carefully.  They would be things like the short end of the yield curve. How is it behaving?  If somehow the high level of reserves and reduced demand for reserves is causing some sort of arbitrage into short- and intermediate-term safe assets, youd expect to see that at the short end of the Treasury yield curve. MR. PLOSSER. So is that like the decline in short-term Treasuries vis--vis the higher reserves that we witnessed recently? MR. ENGLISH.  At least over the intermeeting period, its across the whole yield curve.  So I dont think it matches up with this sort of story, which Id expect at least would be concentrated at the short end, because those are more substitutable. Youd also want to look at how banks are behaving.  If this story is really going to have legs for the economy, at some point, despite what they told us, banks are going to have to ease some standards and terms on their lending. So, clearly, were spending considerable time thinking about the bank lending data 
and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey and how we integrate these things into our modeling. MR. PLOSSER. Would things like quantities of loans, quantities of various kinds, as opposed to just prices, become important? MR. ENGLISH.  Over the intermeeting period, as we discussed in the Greenbook, the survey of terms of business lending came in for the most recent quarter and showed another considerable widening of spreads on business loans.  We can look at some information we have on prices in the syndicated loan 
market and also, as you say, at the quantities.  Our weekly bank credit data may be informative about whether banks are beginning to move. MR. PLOSSER. All right. Thank you. I have a question for Brian on the TAF.  Ill fess up Im one of the ones who keeps asking about price as opposed to just quantities, and Im a little bit confused. Brian, we dont want penalty rates.  The Committee made a conscious decision a while back, 
      when we cut the spread between the primary rate and the funds rate, to reduce the penalty rate of being at the discount window.  We did that as a conscious decision.  But for quite a while now, we have been in a situation where people can almost confidently predict that theyre going to get a lower rate if they go to the auction than if they choose to borrow from the discount window directly.  There are borrowers who come to our discount windows who are of a scale and size and scope where the TAF auction isnt easily available to them in the amounts that they would like to borrow.  So, in fact, were taking one group of borrowers who want to go to the discount window, and were making them borrow at a penalty rate.  Right now were in an environment whereand, de facto, weve set this upif youre big enough and 
want to participate in the TAF, you can get money at a cheaper rate. I remain a little bit puzzled about why we want to perpetuate that differential.  Theyre both discount window lending.  Why dont we want to make borrowers from both of these mechanisms more 
similar?  I understand that if you reduce the quantities enough at an auction, you can raise the price above that minimum, but TAF borrowing is longer term and there are some other restrictions.  So I still remain somewhat puzzled at the reluctance to move the minimum bid closer to the primary credit rate, the rate at which many banks still come and borrow from us.  Maybe Im being dense here, but the logic is escaping me. I havent figured it out yet.  So could you help me out? MR. MADIGAN. Well, I think the basic distinction that we see is the difference between a standing facility and an auction facility.  Im defining a standing facility as one where the borrowing institution comes to us seeking funds.  We want to provide incentives for that bank or firm to find funds in the open market before they come to us, and so we charge a penalty rate for that, which is consistent with traditional central banking theory.  By contrast, in the TAF and the TSLF, were trying, at least conceptually, to place fixed amounts of dollars into the system, that is, make fixed amounts of dollars available to the system and let the market set the price.  If we set any significant penalty, wed simply be undercutting that attempt to provide the dollars into the market in fixed quantities.  Wed be driving off the borrowers. 
         MR. PLOSSER. We have no idea what the quantities are going to be, because its underbid every time. So I dont quite understand.  If were not maxing out on the quantities, then we really arent setting the quantities. The market is setting the quantities, and its setting the quantities based on a low price that we basically are offering.  So Im having trouble reconciling all of this. MR. MADIGAN. Well, I think its fundamentally starting from a view that an auction mechanism simply is not consistent with the penalty price. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  The first is for Bill and the second one is either for Bill or maybe for Brian Sack.  When you presented the simulation results, I had been conflicted in reading the memo and responding to the fact that the banks were saying, Weve got these excess reserves.  Were really not intending to lend them out.  You did the simulationI guess thats kind of natural to look at the implications of lower short-term rates, and that would presumably be more accommodative.  But Im wondering if you learn something else from the surveythat there might be added dysfunction in the lending channel if the banks arent looking to lend out excess reserves that they currently have available to them.  Did we learn more about their lack of intention to stimulate the economy through more lending, or is it pretty much the way we had thought about it before? And that led me to think about the second question. Earlier in the year, we talked a pretty good amount, I thought, in terms of market segmentation and how effective our various programs would be depending on how clogged up markets were.  Arbitrage kind of disperses funds that we would put into the financial system, but when its more segmented, we have a larger effect.  So I guess Im back to the MBS question. Do you think that that program is more effective in a price sense?  Do we have more segments? I dont think we have more segmentation.  Do we have less segmentation?  Regarding the rate effects that we might have estimated early on, would they be smaller now because these are more dispersed? I think thats what President Lacker was trying to get at with Treasuries, but Im not exactly sure. And then theres the next part of this question, which you can answer either today or later.  Do we have an idea of what an estimate of the MBS rates will be when were done with the LSAP programs if it 
           were the full $1 trillion tapered at the end of the first quarter, and if we did what President Hoenig suggested, only $1 trillion tapered to the end of the fourth quarter?  What would those rates look like at the end of the first quarter?  Im not sure I understand the different implications, or at least our thinking on that. MR. ENGLISH. Let me try talking about banks for a second.  I think what we learned from the banks on the whole was consistent with what we thought before, which is that theyre very tight, and we think that they will only gradually ease.  In the staff forecast, thats basically what we built ingradually over the forecast horizon, banks loosen up, they get more comfortable taking on risk, they build up some capital, they get more comfortable with their liquidity positions, and they start lending in a more accommodative way.  I think, broadly at least, thats consistent with what the banks were saying.  Theyre not going to be going out any time soon and lending aggressively, and, basically, we didnt expect to hear 
that. MR. EVANS.  And the interest rate cut in the model analysis already takes into account some impediment from the normal type of lending? MR. ENGLISH. The baseline takes account of it. MR. EVANS.  Okay. Thank you.  Do we have an idea about market segmentation? MR. SACK. Our view is that its not that the MBS purchases have had an effect and the Treasury purchases just didnt work.  Its just that the sizes were disproportionate.  Its easy to see the MBS effects, because the program was so large relative to that market; its harder to see the Treasury effects, because the purchase is supposed to work through supply, but net supply was actually going up quite rapidly. So we may have offset some upward pressure on yields. MR. EVANS.  Well, I was thinking about it differently.  You can do the MBS. You can do the Treasuries. If theyre segmented, theyre different.  If theres no segmentation, theres going to be some arbitrage across the different markets, so it almost doesnt matter where you dump those funds. MR. SACK. Yes. I think the purchases take duration out of the market regardless.  There are some other differences.  The MBS purchases actually take some negative convexity out of the market, 
      too, and you dont have that with Treasuries.  So there are some differences.  But the big effect is all of these purchases pull out duration, and, in that regard, you would think they would have some effect on all longer-term assets, and I think thats true to a degree. But I think one thing we realize is that theres not perfect substitution across our asset classes, so when we talk about large-scale MBS purchases, we see the effect most pronounced on MBS rates. MR. EVANS.  But in March we were stymied by the segmentation, I thought.  We thought it was really big, and now things seem different.  So I would guess that the estimated effect would be smaller. MR. SACK. Well, I think it means that there are spillovers, but theyre just hard to see.  If we talk about the effect of the MBS purchases and we look at the spread and say, Well, maybe it looks like 
the spread is 50 basis points, so the effect on the spread is 50 basis points.  I think it means probably that the effect on the rate is actually larger and some of it has spilled over into Treasuries as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE. My question revolves around how your analysis and your conclusions would have been different if the banks had expressed a stronger willingness to lend some time in the near future.  It seems to me that when we started down this path, we did expect the rate we were paying to be a floor on the fed funds rate, and it turned out not to be.  But if the banks were strongly interested in lending and chasing loan funds, it seems as if that would be the point where it would turn out to be a floor.  Am I 
thinking about that correctly or not? MR. ENGLISH. It might well push up short-term rates, as banks were less likely to run off deposits and manage liabilities because they saw better lending opportunities.  In terms of the simulation that we did, one of the knobs we didnt turn was an easing in credit.  If you turn that knob, youd get a bigger effect on output and unemploymentstill not huge, but a larger effect for sure.  So I think that, if the banks had been telling us, yes, were likely to ease our lending standards and terms early next year, then our exercise would have showed a bigger effect on output and probably a smaller effect on rates. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 
             MR. FISHER. First, Mr. Chairman, I agree with President Plossers question about TAF versus the penalty rate on the discount window, but we talked about that a long, long time ago.  I think its a good point to take into account. My question is for Bill.  We had four institutions in this little sample.  They account for 35 percent of the excess reserves.  How many institutions would you have to take into account, say, to get to 75 percent of excess reserves or 50 percent?  In other words, are they concentrated in the top ten?  Five? Twenty? Guess? MR. ENGLISH. I dont know the answer.  Id have to check.  I think the whole industry is concentrated, so if you took the top 25 banks, youd probably have a huge majority of the reserves, but I just dont know for sure. MR. FISHER. I guess what concerns me is that these monies are languishing in the system.  Theyre unlent and theyre unmultiplied.  And, again, here we have differentiation in the market.  We have been worried about whenjust to use an ugly analogythis giant fur ball finally gets released from this big pipe.  Were worried about a way to neutralize it.  But meanwhile its lying fallow in a sense, from the standpoint of people that want to borrow, assuming theres loan demand.  If you go through each one of your boxes, we dont know how much buffer people want over regulatory norms no increase in lending.  Mr. Lacker pointed out no change in lending terms and standards.  I guess, again, like President 
Plosser, I may be a dunce on this one.  Im not saying youre a dunce, Charles.  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER. Ive been called worse things. 
MR. FISHER.  Ill share the dunce cap with you.  Im concerned that this money is unlent and unmultiplied and represses velocity.  I realize that the suspenders that President Dudley talked about go to what were trying to treat, but thats not an issue presently.  I just worry about the distortions it creates in 
the system, and I wondered if you had any comments on that, or maybe I just need a basic tutorial from you also. MR. ENGLISH. I need a little help on what your concern is. 
     MR. FISHER.  It concerns me that weve ramped up reserve balances to $1.2 trillion, money that were almost incentivizing not to go out into the marketplace and paying a rate of interest, right?  Its small but it does concern me that its not being put into the system.  We have an unlent, unmultiplied buildup in reserves. Now, we worry that it could expand too quickly and come back in the system and thats all of these treatments that you went through in your second presentation was all about.  But in the meantime, its like theyre sitting in the system lying fallow.  Am I missing something here? MS. YELLEN. We could cut the interest rate we pay on reserves, and then it would be less likely to lie fallow. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It wouldnt be in the system at all if we werent doing the quantitative easing, and its not constraining anything else because its not affecting leverage ratios. MR. FISHER.  As I said, this is what happens in quantitative easing. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. FISHER. Anyway, your chart number 1 shows a very rapid rundown.  Im just questioning, I guess, that rapid rundown, given the unwillingness of people to lend and the incentives were providing for reserve retention.  But if its a dumb question, lets take it off the table, Mr. Chairman. MR. ENGLISH.  Well, I think the decline in the stock of reserves has to do with the fact that securities that were bulking up on now will mature, the mortgages will prepay, and so those assets will run off over time, and currency will grow over time. MR. FISHER. I guess what Ive gotten out of this conversation is a better understanding of why safe, short- and intermediate-term securities have been priced as theyve been priced and are yielding 
what theyre yielding, but I remain concerned that these monies remain unlent and unmultiplied in the short term. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, you had a two-hander? MR. PLOSSER. Yes. I wanted to follow up on Governor Dukes question.  She asked about lending standards and banks behavior.  The way I interpreted what she was asking was about the supply side or willingness of banks to lend. But, as we witnessed in the last intermeeting period, a lot of the 
        private-sector forecasts for growth have been ramped up substantially in the last few months, both for this year and for next year in some cases, to varying degrees.  So, in some ways, the issue is not just the banks willingness to lend, but also what the new demand for loans is going to be.  While banks may not lower their lending standards, as the demand for loans from the private sector begins to ramp up with 
continued economic growth, they may not change their lending standards, but those excess reserves will get translated into loans as the demand for new loans goes up, and the price may rise as well.  So its not just what the banks are willing to do, but also how demand will evolve over the course of this recovery that will determine some of that.  You did mention that, but I think both of them are clearly important. MR. ENGLISH. I agree. As I think I said in my briefing, a couple of the banks pointed exactly to this. As the economy recovers, demand for loans will pick up even if they dont do any easing at all. MR. PLOSSER. Exactly. 
MR. ENGLISH. They will have more creditworthy customers coming to them, and they plan to meet that demand. MR. PLOSSER. Using reserves to do so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I will follow up on a couple of things.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you talked earlier about where in the yield curve you would expect the effect of quantitative easing to show up, and you suggested the short end.  I guess youre thinking six months or less. MR. ENGLISH.  Well, the banks talked about short- and intermediate-term maturities out to two or three years. MR. LACKER. Two or three years.  Okay.  Weve seen that.  But youre saying that because weve seen effects farther out the yield curve.  That counts against quantitative easing as a monocausal explanation for what has happened over the intermeeting period.  But it doesnt rule it out, right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Well, it could be a piece.  I think it doesnt rule it out, but, as I say, I would have expected a change in the shape of the yield curve.  What we got was pretty much a uniform shift. MR. LACKER. They hold a fair amount of agencies, is my understanding. MR. ENGLISH.  Agency MBS for sure.  Im not sure about straight agency debt. MR. LACKER. Yes, I dont think theres much debt.  I think agency MBS. Brian, I have a question about your yield effect estimates: Shouldnt that depend on how they are financed, like what we do on the other side of our balance sheet, right?  If our early purchases were essentially sterilized by offsetting reductions in borrowings, thats going to have a different effect on agency yields than if we add enough to reserves that it induces those yields to fall. Do you see what Im saying? MR. SACK. When you think about the effects through a portfolio-balance channel, youre right that it depends on if and how the purchases are sterilized.  If youre buying MBS and sterilizing that by selling long-term Treasuries, youd be having a much smaller effect on duration in the market, and so it would be getting a smaller yield effect. MR. LACKER. Right. 
MR. SACK. If its sterilized through reverse repos, for example, even if the reserve paths arent different, essentially the portfolio-balance effect still works, because youve changed the duration and the supply of those assets in the market, which is what we think, at least partially, prompts the effect on yields. MR. LACKER. The estimate you gave us earlierI cant remember what it was.   What was the estimate?  MR. SACK. The estimate of the effect of total program purchases? 
   MR. LACKER. No, it was the incremental effect. MR. SACK. I said that if the MBS purchases were ended at $1 trillion, then perhaps the upward pressure on MBS rates would be 15 to 30 basis points. MR. LACKER. 15 to 30. 
MR. SACK. Again, its a very uncertain estimate, but just to put an order of magnitude on the table. MR. MADIGAN. If I could just break in for a minute, Brians estimates are consistent with our previous staff estimates, which were based on an event study methodology.  That, by its nature, should abstract from any effect due to changes in our financing of the securities.  We simply look at how much yields change during a narrow window of time in which announcements of our purchases were made, and we got estimates very similar to those that 
Brian did. MR. SACK. Right. This is really to a point Bill Dudley made.  We are talking strictly about supply effects, portfolio-balance effects.  Any signals about the path of short-term interest rates or the FOMCs policy inclinations would be on top of that.  So if it were interpreted as a step towards tightening, and market participants, for example, moved up the expected timing of tightening, you would get further effects. MR. LACKER. Well, now Im confused.  You gave us these estimates earlier in the year. Are you interpreting these announcements as being viewed by market participants as sterilized or unsterilized additions to the stock of our holdings? MR. SACK. I would say unsterilized. Certainly, the biggest announcements in March were beyond the period in which the Desk was sterilizing the operations. 
  MR. LACKER. How does this estimate line up with what has happened so far, which presumably is sterilized? MR. SACK. Im sorry.  What exactly is sterilized? MR. LACKER. You gave me some estimates of effects.  You were talking about estimates of effects that have occurred so far during a period where we have essentially sterilized them. MR. SACK. No, I would say we have not sterilized the purchases. MR. LACKER. I dont see how you can say that.  Earlier in the year we were buying MBS, and you kept forecasting increases in reserves.  They kept not happening. Borrowing kept 
falling. It looks as if they were sterilized. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. De facto sterilized because of the offsetting movements. MR. LACKER. Yes. De facto sterilized by offsetting, right. 
MR. SACK. Okay. But if were talking about sterilization through short-term credit, and through the withdrawal of short-term credit, youre still left with a change in the supply of the long-term asset, youre still left with the shift in duration from the purchases.  There are different kinds of sterilization. If youre sterilizing, as I said, by selling long-term assets, that would really work against the portfolio-balance effect.  If its being sterilized by reducing short-term credit, I dont think it works against the portfolio-balance effect that much, because it is not affecting the fact that the market is holding that much less duration than it was before. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think I detected a little appetite for coffee around the table.  [Laughter] So why dont we take fifteen minutes and come back at 4:05 p.m.? Thank you. [Coffee break] 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why dont we recommence?  Weve had a number of issues raised by the presentations. First, there were some recommendations from the Desk on large-scale asset purchases, including possible tapering strategies.  Second, we had some discussion of reserve management tools and the progress there.  Third, there was a proposal essentially on the TAF and the TSLF. Let me just mention parenthetically that, as I understand it from talking to Scott, no votes are needed to implement those proposals, because the TSLF directive in particular told the Desk to wind down the options as conditions permit.  Id be happy to hear comments.  But if people would like to disagree with the press release or the plan, please say so. If we get more or less consensus around the table, we wont have to take a formal action on that, I think. So those are three topics that we can talk about. This part of the meeting is billed on the agenda as an opportunity for informal, unstructured interaction [laughter], which I am going to duck, I think, in a minute.  I hope this is a chance for us just to have some interchange.  Let me just be very clear that we will not be making any decisions in this part of the meeting; the decisions on large-scale asset purchases, 
and so on, will be taken tomorrow in the policy round.  So please dont feel that you are 
compelled to speak in order to get your voice heardyou will be heard.  But it would be useful, I think, to have some additional discussion. Before we get into that, I just wanted to say a word or two about the quantitative easing mechanism, because I feel as if theres a certain amount of confusion going on.  So let me just say three straightforward things. The first point, and I think we all agree on this, is that any action we takethrough purchases or auctions or whateverto put reserves into the banking system, on net, will be expansionary, because whatever the banks do along the lines of what they told Bill English and 
   his colleagueswhether its buying other assets, or lending, or whatever action they takewill tend to be expansionary.  Of course, in equilibrium this will be reflected in lower short-term interest rates across a range of potential assets.  And thats essentially how quantitative easing works. Its meant to be expansionary, and I think it would be in the context that were using it here. President Yellen made a good point during the break, which was that quantitative easing should be expansionary even if the leverage ratio were binding.  The reason is that, in order to avoid the leverage ratio, firms would either have to get rid of managed liabilities or lower deposit rates and otherwise prevent the inflow of cash into their institution.  If depositors are not incentivized to put money into banks, they will go to money market mutual funds or to other types of short-term credit markets, and that, again, will have the effect of lowering short-term 
interest rates, and, therefore, be expansionary.  So I dont think that there really is any barrier to quantitative easing being effective in our current institutional environment.   The second observation I would make is based on Bills simulations; based on what we know, we think the quantitative easing effects are probably pretty small.  Short-term interest rates are already low. They might be made a little bit lower by quantitative easing, but I dont 
see much chance of a huge overshoot in a short period of time.  I think thats not what the evidence suggests. Its not what the Japanese experience suggests.  So quantitative easing should be expansionary, but I dont see it as being a major part of our overall monetary policy stance. And then, the third thing Id like to say is that we can exit from the high level of reserves.  We have, in fact, three methods to do thatwe have two belts as well as a pair of suspenders.  First of all, we have the interest on reserves, which may be leaky, but certainly if its raised high enough it will tighten policythere seems to be little doubt about that.  Second, we have the various ways of sterilizing reserves through reverse repos or time deposits.  I wasnt quite clear 
 about the timing, but my sense is that these things will be coming online by early next year.  So over the time frame in which we would have to do a significant amount of tightening, we should have the tools in place to do that.  Then, of course, the third method we know we can do is sell assets. I think that that would not only have effects via the reversal of quantitative easing, but it also would have very powerful signaling and market effects.   These are very important issues for us to understand.  But I felt there was an impression somehow that we were not in control of the situation.  I dont think thats true.  Obviously, its a difficult and novel situation, but I do think that the staff and all of us working together have a pretty good understanding of how to manage this and how this relates to standard monetary policy. So thats my little homily.  Let me now open up the floor for any comments on asset purchases, reserve management, TAF, TSLF, any of those things that anyone would like to bring up, and I would invite interaction.  Would anyone like to raise any points?  Ah, President Lacker, I knew I could count on you. [Laughter] MR. LACKER. I just have a question about SFP.  If you want to talk about this more tomorrow in your presentation, and tee it up to do that, Im fine with that, but it sort of gets to a broader issue. The SFP is now projected to fall, consistent with the Treasurys announcement, and then rise again. I noticed that in our previous Bluebook it had been projected to stay longer where it is now, fall, and remain at zero permanently.  I was confused about the shift in the forecast after this intermeeting period, and I wondered what that represents. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, let me comment on that briefly.  First of all, I think its important for us to be able to do what we need to do without relying on the Treasury.  Obviously, we need to maintain that independence and that flexibility.  Whatever help they can provide, of 
 course, is a bonus. Ive had some discussions with Secretary Geithner and others, and the view was that because the debate on the debt ceilingwhich will probably be toward the end of the yearcould be contentious for a lot of reasons, it would be a good idea for us to have a low profile and not be part of this discussion. For that reason, I suggested to him that they run it down to a very low level until such time as all that discussion was completed.  Once the debt ceiling is raised, they are perfectly comfortable bringing the SFPs back up to some level.  Of course, at one point, it was over $500 billionis that right, Brian? MR. MADIGAN. Thats correct. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So theres some scope there, depending on how high the debt ceiling goes. But that being said, there is a sort of sine wave aspect of this, if we run into a debt ceiling again, for example, at the end of next year.  So I think its something that will on average be of some assistance if we get into a sterilization mode, but clearly we dont want to count on that as an essential element of our strategy. MR. LACKER. Its a $185 billion bulge, obviously.  And it adds a lot, right at the peak of that curve there. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. When is the peak in the reserves? 
MR. MADIGAN. Its early next year.  Its in Bills chart. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Middle of next year, I thought. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Well, I think theres an early peak because of the SFP, and then the later peak because of the condition of our purchases. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. Theres a peak because of the SFP, but, of course, the balance sheet doesnt max out until after the MBS would be settled sometime early next year.  And by that time, if all goes well, the SFP would be back in action. 
 MR. LACKER. You took into account the monetary policy effects when you discussed this with the Secretary? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, given that were not in a mode of tightening at this point, I think that the effects would occur only through quantitative easing.  I think theyd be modest. But if necessary, of course, we can adjust in other dimensions.  MR. LACKER. The longer-run projection used to be zero.  Why were we projecting zero, and then we changed that to $200 billion? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont know. MR. MADIGAN. On further reflection, we thought it might make more sense just to assume that the level was held up, because it is a possible tool for absorbing reserves in the future. MR. LACKER. Do we have an understanding with the Treasury about it returning to $200 billion? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My personal discussions with the Secretary suggested that they were very comfortable raising it up again when the debt ceiling permitted.  But, again, I 
dont think we should have either a formal understanding nor should we rely on it because of the independence issue. Vice Chairman, did you have a comment? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I dont know if we should talk about the agency MBS purchase program today or tomorrow, but it is 4:15, so today seems like a good time.  I think your comments on the exit were very appropriate in the sense that if we really think that the exit is manageable, then you really have to take that concern off the table in 
 terms of thinking about the agency MBS purchase program.  So the discussion is then based on how do you want financial conditions to evolve over the next, say, 6 to 12 months? My view is that the end of the agency MBS purchase program is going to tighten financial conditions over that time frame, in any case.  We can argue about how much its going to tighten, but its going to move in that direction.  So the question is: Given that were already on a path that financial conditions are going to tighten, why would you want to pare back this program?  That would just exacerbate the tightening in financial conditions at a time that policy is not as accommodative as we would like.  If you look at the Bluebook, the unconstrained federal funds rate path is minus 4 percent.  So I really dont see the logic for why wed want to back away from this program, if we stipulate that we arent worried about the exit problem. If you are worried about the exit problem, then I can understand why you could care about whether the balance sheet was $100 billion bigger or smaller.  My view is that not only should we do the entire $1 trillion, I think we should commit to doing that $1 trillion at this meeting for three reasons. MR. BULLARD. Are we doing the policy debate now? I can get into the policy debate, if you want. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Lets let him finish, and then you can respond. MR. BULLARD. You just said, Dont go off on your policy round today.  Hes preempting the debate. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Im happy to defer until tomorrow, if youd like. MR. BULLARD. I dont mind, but if you want to do it now, we can do it now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  Why dont you defer that point until tomorrow? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. Fair enough. 
      CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there any other questions about the broader issues? President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had the impression from earlier conversations weve had that, at least at one stage, there were two mechanisms under consideration, one being the classic corridor system and the other being a mechanism more centered on interest on reserves, where the interest on reserves would become the policy rate.  Is it a foregone conclusion that were going back to a classic corridor system? The whole discussion is about the ability to manipulate excess reserves in an interest on reserves regime to a degree that we could decouple those things.  Maybe Im the one who is unclear, but are we going back to a classic corridor system?  Is that a foregone conclusion? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we werent really on a corridor system before.  We had a target, which was the federal funds rate, and we were manipulating reserves to hit that target. Our interest on reserves strategy would be a corridor system.  It would be a rate at which we would pay interest, which presumably would be the floor or would help establish the floor, and then there would be a lending rate, which would presumably be the ceiling. I think thats a really good question.  Heres the problem we have with the federal funds rate: Given some of the things we might be doing in order to try to get better control of reserves, we may make the federal funds rate a less informative interest rate.  For example, right now most of the liquidity in the federal funds market is coming from the GSEs.  If we start pulling their liquidity out in order to firm up the interest rate floor, then the federal funds market might be a very illiquid market.  Theres still a bank-to-bank market, but we dont have the same kind of data on that. 
  So I think we have three optionsBrian, you and the staff can certainly comment.  One would be to find a way to do the federal funds rate, including perhaps additional information from bank transactions.  The second would be to choose another short-term rate, like the repo rate, which might work.  And the third would be to make the interest rate on reserves and the primary credit rate the announced variables, which, of course, we know we can do.  We could imagine a statement of policy that would announce changes in those two interest rates, plus some open market operations to sterilize a certain amount of reserves.  Ive mentioned this to staff.  I do think we need to give this some more thought.  Brian, do you have anything to add? MR. MADIGAN. Just one additional comment, Mr. Chairman.  I think it would be helpful, and I wasnt sure what exactly President Lockharts question was directed at in the following sense. I think its useful to distinguish between the transition phase, where there will be a very high level of reserve balancesand that may be over a matter of yearsand the subsequent long-run steady state for monetary policy implementation.  They may involve two fairly different approaches to implementing monetary policy.  For instance, it may be the case that the excess reserves rate does serve as the floor, or at least a soft floor, during the transition phase, as the quantity of reserves is going down.  But the Committee would have it at its disposal, and the staff would come back to report to the Committee at some point on the possibility of a number of different operating frameworks further in the future. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Youre working on that? MR. MADIGAN. Yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, good. Any other points? Governor Warsh. 
MR. WARSH.  There was discussion in a memo about when we get to exit, and whether we should supplement those actions with asset sales. There was also a discussion with plenty of 
 caveats about what kind of losses could be realized on that portfolio if rates were to go up 100 basis points. My first instinct was, Boy, we could hedge that perfectly.  [Laughter] But then I realized the imprudence of that.  If we dont sell those securities, but, in a continued vanguard of transparency, the world is aware of these embedded losses, do we know how that would impact our reporting?  What kind of regime, both from a GAAP sense and also a public disclosure sense, would govern us? Is it the sale of these long-term assets that is the question, or is it the embedded losses that could potentially be the question? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me give that a try.  Just from a pure accounting perspective, were on a cost basis, so we wouldnt be reporting any capital losses.  I think its not clear that the capital losses or gains are very material to anything for the following reasons.  So long as our cost of carrywhich is zero on cash plus whatever rates we pay on deposits, and so onis below the coupon on the MBS, then we would be making positive flow income, which is seigniorage to the Treasury. From an income perspective, unless we get to about 8 percent short-term ratesI think thats the number that was calculated in an earlier meetingwell actually be making money in some sense on these transactions, which will then be reflected in payments to the Treasury. So I think from that perspective the politics is okay. If we sell a lot of assets, then we have to realize the losses.  That probably has not much economic meaning; it could have some public relations implications.  Since were dealing only with appearances and not with actuality, one way to deal with that would be to try to sell assets that are in the money first or pair them with assets that are in losses.  That would be one way to sell assets without realizing net losses.   The final comment I would make is that Ive had some discussions with the Treasury about this, because well be returning to the Treasury very high levels of seigniorage over the 
          next few years. I think there would be some basis for withholding some of those earnings to augment our capital, so that if we do have losses, wed be able to absorb them.  Those are some of the considerations. Would Brian or anyone like to add to that? MR. LACKER. A capital buffer for us? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, absolutely. 
MR. LACKER. Above our statutory? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We dont have statutory capital. MR. LACKER. Above what we do now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. WARSH.  Just as a follow-up, Mr. Chairman, I have an accounting question.  I take what you say and it makes sense, but suppose we were to sell assets that were some subset of the 
overall pool and substantially similar to assets we didnt sell.  Even though were in this cost accounting regime, I wondered whether or not some more explicit imputed loss would be attributed, if not in the consolidated financial statements, then in the balance sheet.  If we were in the world of a real bank and those unsold assets were similar, then youd be stuck with that problem.  But, again, I dont know if from a government GAAP perspective thats a real accounting problem or if from a political economy or transparency perspective that begs the question. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im no accounting expert, but because we buy and sell assets all the time and it doesnt affect our cost basis accounting, I cant imagine that that would have a direct implication. Governor Duke? 
    MS. DUKE.  There is a reason why we dont mark them to market, and Ive read it, and I cant remember what it was. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, this may be it.  [Laughter] Did anyone have any concerns or comments?  President Plosser and President Fisher noted the issue on penalty rates, but did anyone have any other issues about the proposal to reduce the two auction facilities? Any other comments or observations?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Id just like to second the notion that the minimum bid rate is a policy parameter that we set, and I fail to see why an auction would be inconsistent with raising that to a penalty rate. And its a little odd that the term structure is inverted for those funds. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, I actually have some sympathy for this view, and the only thing that worries me a bit at this juncture is that its kind of a funny time to be changing the structure of the auction when were in the process of winding it down.  But I think that arguably we could have had a higher minimum bid rate earlier on. MR. PLOSSER. Just to follow up with that, I appreciate that comment.  I think what that should suggest to us is that the staff could begin to pursue how to think about a more permanent, longer-term life for the TAF.  This is an issue that needs to be grappled with so that in the future we dont find ourselves having this same debate. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Absolutely. My understanding is that, in order to have the TAF as an ongoing facility, even in reserve, we would have to do a rulemaking.  Is that correct? MR. MADIGAN. I believe thats correct, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I believe thats right. Scott? 
MR. ALVAREZ. Yes, thats right.  In fact, we committed to putting the proposal out for comment before making the TAF a permanent facility. 
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, we would do a rulemaking for comment.  That would be an excellent opportunity to make any revisions to the structure for our permanent facility. We do need to vote to ratify open market operations. MR. KOHN. So moved. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any opposed?   (No response.)  Okay, thank you. If everyone is okay with it, why dont we turn now to the economic outlook? And the presentation will be by Dave Stockton and Nathan Sheets.  Dave. MR. STOCKTON. Thank you Mr. Chairman.  It was with some dismay that I listened to you at Jackson Hole last month wonder out loud whether the FOMC might actually improve its lot by seeking guidance from astrological forecasts, a proposal that I assume was motivated by your experience with the analysis of the staff.  I think weve shown ourselves to be appropriately eclectic in the tools that we have employed over timea necessary reflection of our admittedly vast ignorance about many important economic relationships.  However, my colleagues and I want to draw the line at studying planetary alignment, tarot cards, or the entrails of chickens.  [Laughter] Of course, I recognize that at least a few of you probably view consulting the entrails of a chicken and consulting an expectations-augmented Phillips curve to be observationally equivalent [Laughter]. In any event, I would like to argue this afternoon that the sizable revisions that we have made to our forecast this round did not reflect a reinterpretation of celestial events, but rather resulted, as is always the case, from a dispassionate and reasoned examination of flawed data through the lens of imperfect models.  What we took 
away from that examination was a view that the economy is expanding at present, and with more vigor than we had previously anticipated.  Indeed, the news on spending and production has been noticeably better than we expected just six weeks ago. One prominent area in that regard has been the housing sector.  Home sales and housing starts have been moving up fairly steadily since the spring and have continued to outstrip our expectations by an appreciable margin.  Inventories of unsold new homes have now been worked down to a very low level.  And house 
prices, which had fallen steeply and steadily since 2007, turned up in the second quarter in a fairly wide range of measures.  Expectations of house prices going forward also have improved, according to the respondents to the Michigan survey andreadings from futures on house prices. We still see difficulties ahead for housing in coming quarters, especially as a pickup in foreclosure-related inventories puts renewed downward pressure on prices.  But to better balance the risks in our forecast in light of the more favorable incoming 
         data, we have a shallower decline in house prices in coming quarters and an earlier upturn than we had previously projected.  Accompanying this improvement, we now expect a somewhat faster recovery in construction activity, though to a level that by the end of 2011 is still well below those that prevailed prior to the downturn. Elsewhere in the household sector, consumer spending also has exceeded our expectations, even abstracting from the sizable boost that has been provided by the cash-for-clunkers program.  Much, though not all, of the surprise in non-motor vehicle outlays came in the form of a jump in retail control spending in August.  We are inclined to discount some of that strength because the data are noisy and the 
underlying fundamentals remain so weak.  But still, it was a positive innovation, and 
we have raised our forecast for the growth of real PCE in the second half by  percentage point to an annual rate of 1 percent. Likewise, business equipment spending has exceeded our earlier forecast. Real E&S now looks poised to post a small increase, on net, in the second half, in contrast to the roughly 5 percent annual rate decline that we had projected in the August Greenbook. Supporting the somewhat firmer tone of the recent data, survey measures of business sentiment have improved as well.  That said, we certainly arent hearing anything that would suggest an imminent and powerful resurgence in capital 
spending, and we dont expect the growth in equipment spending to pick up appreciably until a recovery in final sales becomes more firmly established toward the 
middle of next year. For some time, an easing of inventory liquidation has been a central element in our expectation that aggregate activity would turn up in the second half of this year.  And that process appears to be in train.  Indeed, revised data now show that businesses made deeper reductions in stocks through midyear than previously reported, and with the final sales picture having brightened some, the inventory situation has become more comfortable.  That is certainly the case in the motor 
vehicle sector, where production is now being lifted to restore depleted stocks.  But inventory-sales ratios are off their peaks in a reasonably wide swath of industries, and a fairly broad-based pickup in factory output has occurred in the past couple of monthsan uptrend that we think will be extended in coming months in light of indications that order flows have been improving. In addition to the implications of the stronger incoming data, a number of other important factors conditioning our projection have improved as well.  Most notably, the stock market is about 5 percent above the levels anticipated at the time of the August Greenbook, and longer-term interest rates are somewhat lower.  The path of crude oil prices is several dollars a barrel under the trajectory built into our prior forecast. And, as Nathan will discuss in more detail, the incoming data and outlook 
for foreign activity have strengthened further.  Putting all of these factors together, we are now projecting real GDP to grow at an annual rate of 2 percent in the second half of this year, about 1 percentage points 
         faster than anticipated in our August forecast.  Growth is then expected to pick up to 3 percent next year, an upward revision of  percentage point.  We project a further acceleration to 4 percent in 2011. While that acceleration is a bit more pronounced than in our previous forecast, the basic contour of the projected recovery is still being shaped by factors that we have been citing for some time now.  Housing begins a modest upturn, the inventory cycle provides a boost to production, financial strains continue to gradually ease, and the drag from negative wealth effects diminishes.  As sales, production, and employment then begin to firm, activity benefits further from usual multiplieraccelerator effects and improving household and business confidence. Although growth rates of 3 to 4 percent seem pretty solid, especially by recent standards, I would still characterize our projected recovery as tepid.  In our forecast, real GDP doesnt exceed the previous peak it reached in early 2008 until the final 
quarter of 2010, the longest such episode in the postwar period.  Even a year from now, we expect the unemployment rate to be in the neighborhood of 9 and 9 percent, and two years from now in the neighborhood of 8 percent, still nearly 3 percentage points above our estimate of the NAIRU. One important reason that we anticipate such a modest pace of recovery is that businesses and households are expected to remain cautious in lifting production, hiring, and spending in response to a gradually improving economic and financial environment.  But Ill admit that this forecast depends heavily on judgment calls 
about how to taper off the substantial negative residuals that have emerged in our spending equations over the past year or so.  And there isnt a lot of science to guide those judgment calls. An important upside risk to the projection is that recovery could exhibit greater upward momentum than we currently project.  This isnt merely a prospective concern. Since March, broader financial conditions have improved faster than we had anticipated, and it now appears that economic activity is turning up earlier and with somewhat greater vigor than we had expected.  As weve seen in recent months, better financial and economic conditions can feed off each other in a virtuous cycle, with further positive effects on sentiment and spending, just as they fed off each other in a negative manner on the way down.  Should that pattern continue, we could be looking at a noticeably stronger economy over the next two years than we are currently projecting. We illustrated some of these self-reinforcing dynamics in the V-shaped recovery scenario included in the Greenbook. Of course, we also see sizable counterbalancing risks to the downside of our projection. While I suspect that it is an acquired taste, I actually enjoy perusing old Greenbooks. Those from 2002 make for some interesting reading.  Early that year, we were surprised by how well aggregate activity was holding up after the terrible shock of September 11.  Not only did it appear that activity was getting a lift from the end of an inventory cycle, but final sales were coming in above expectations, 
        purchasing managers were reporting stronger order books, and consumer sentiment was improving.  The staff projection called for a noticeable acceleration of activity into 2003. But as the year progressed, activity did not continue to accelerate, and it became clear that sour business sentiment, continuing pessimism, and a lingering 
capital overhang were restraining the expansion by more than we had thought would be the case. There was, so to speak, a failure to launch. There is, similarly, a clear risk that the present improvement in activity will not transition into the modest acceleration that we are projecting, but rather will stall out at more meager rates of economic growth.  Despite the improvement in many aspects of financial market functioning, credit conditions remain tight and overall financial headwinds could prove stiffer than we have assumed in this forecast.  Moreover, the 
response of businesses and particularly households to the financial shock could prove larger and more durable than we have incorporated in our forecast.  We illustrated 
one aspect of that concern with an alternative simulation incorporating a much higher saving rate than in the baseline forecast.  If the economy fails to develop further upward momentum, then it would not be difficult to imagine giving back some of the recent gains registered in financial markets and experiencing a new wave of concern about the condition of banks balance sheets, with consequent effects on prospective aggregate demand and output. While both the upside and downside risks to our projection for real activity loom large and seem plausible, I dont view the staff forecast as an average of two more likely outcomesa boom and a stall.  I think the most probable outcome remains one 
of gradual recovery. But the probability distribution covering these outcomes seems pretty flat to me.  Moreover, even if a gradual recovery comes to pass, it will undoubtedly be characterized by fits and starts, rather than the relatively smooth acceleration that we are forecasting.  And that will add to the difficulties of distinguishing among these three possibilities for some time to come. Let me now turn to inflation, where we have made only modest adjustments to our forecast this round. We have revised up our estimate of total PCE price inflation 
in the current quarter by about  percentage point to an annual rate of nearly 3 percent, but lowered our fourth-quarter forecast by  percentage point to 
1 percent. This pattern of revision largely reflects some sharper-than-expected increases that have been posted by retail gasoline prices, which we expect will be 
mostly retraced in coming months given the fallback in crude oil prices.  Food prices 
have surprised us to the downside, and early crop reports suggest that an ample 
harvest will likely hold down farm prices and, with a lag, retail food prices in coming quarters. The August reading on core CPI was a handful of basis points above our expectation and that, along with somewhat firmer prices for medical services in the PPI, led us to mark up our current-quarter forecast of core PCE prices by  percentage point to 1 percent.  We are projecting core inflation to edge down to a 1 percent pace in the fourth quarter. 
       In response to the higher levels of resource utilization that we are showing in this Greenbook, we nudged up our core inflation projection by 0.1 percentage point in 2010. But the basic contour of the projection remains unchanged.  We continue to believe that the very wide margin of slack in the economy will put further downward pressure on inflation but that this downward pressure will be tempered by relatively stable inflation expectations. Core PCE price inflation is expected to recede from a pace of 1.4 percent this year to 1.1 percent in 2010 and 1 percent in 2011.  Total PCE inflation is expected to move up from 1 percent this year to 1 percent in 2010, as food and energy prices turn back up, and then is projected to drop back to 1 percent in 2011, close to the pace of core inflation.  Nathan will continue our presentation. MR. SHEETS. The global recovery that began in Asia now looks to be more broad-based than it appeared in August.  Recent data indicate that activity abroad 
expanded in the second quarter at a 1 percent pace, a full percentage point faster than we had expected, with positive surprises in both emerging-market and advanced 
economies.  This outcomealong with improving data on manufacturing and trade, 
further healing in financial markets, and the stronger U.S. outlookhas led us to 
revise up our projection of foreign economic growth  percentage point in the second half this year and  percentage point in 2010. The emerging-market economies are likely to lead the recovery, with growth averaging near 5 percent through the forecast period.  Activity in the advanced 
foreign economies should also pick up steam, rising from about a 2 percent rate 
during the second half of this year to over 3 percent in 2011.  The near-term global expansion is supported by a turn in the inventory cycle, improvements in business and consumer sentiment, and the ongoing effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus. Our forecast seeks to balance two competing considerations.  On the one hand, the remarkable depth of the recent recession and very low levels of resource utilization provide scope for a snapback in activity as improving conditions unleash pent-up demand.  On the other hand, strong headwinds from lingering stresses in the financial sector, weak labor market conditions, and expiring fiscal stimulus are likely to restrain growth over the next two years, particularly in the advanced economies.  In response to these considerations, we have penciled in a recovery that envisions foreign growth that is well above trend, but we also anticipate that significant slack will persist through the end of the forecast period. In China, recent readings on industrial production, investment, and retail sales point to continued strong expansion.  Following new measures by the Chinese authorities to moderate credit growth, bank lending slowed significantly in July and August. However, the authorities have issued assurances that their policies will remain accommodative until a sustainable recovery is at hand.  Until such time, the authorities are likely to continue to struggle to strike the right balance between constraining speculative behavior and maintaining an appropriately stimulative stance of policy.  As such, it remains to be seen whether the Chinese authorities will achieve 
a smooth dismount from the extraordinary stimulus implemented in the first half of 
       the year. Growth elsewhere in the region continues to be buoyed by demand from China, but domestic stimulus and rebounding private spending are also lending support. Going forward, economic growth in emerging Asia should remain strong, at around 6 percent, through the forecast period.  But key risks include the possibility 
that external demand may be slow to recover or that stimulative monetary conditions, coupled with the relatively favorable outlook for the region, may trigger unsustainable increases in asset prices.  The contraction in euro-area GDP during the second quarter was much smaller than expected, as the German and French economies showed positive growth, 
supported by improved export performance.  In addition, automobile purchases 
surged as consumers responded to government incentives.  With these incentives now winding down, we expect euro-area consumption to weaken again, but a turnaround in inventories, further gains in exports, and rebounding business sentiment should fuel economic growth in the region of around 1 percent in the second half.  Thereafter, we see a moderate recovery taking hold, with GDP expanding at a 2-3 percent pace, but headwinds from weak labor market conditions and stresses in the financial sector will constrain growth going forward. Recent signs also point to a near-term rebound among our North American neighbors. After several quarters of contraction, Canadian economic growth is expected to rebound to 2 percent in the second half of this year, as improved conditions in the auto sector fuel a rise in exports and a strengthening in domestic demand.  The hard-hit Mexican economy, which over the past year has contracted nearly 10 percent (its largest decline on record), now appears to be reviving as well.  Mexican auto production was up sharply in August, and business sentiment is rising.  In line with these improvements, as well as a reversal of economic drag from the 
swine flu outbreak, the Mexican economy should begin to recover in the second half of this year. In 2010 and 2011, both Canada and Mexico should benefit from the strengthening expansion in the United States. We expect that headline CPI inflation in the major foreign economies will remain muted through the forecast period, with persistent slack preventing inflation from breaking out on the upside and well-anchored inflation expectations keeping inflation from dipping much on the downside.  In this environment, the major central banks are assumed to leave policy rates at their current low levels for quite some time.  The Bank of Canada has made a conditional commitment to keep its policy rate at 25 basis points through the second quarter of 2010.  As such, we expect the Bank to wait at least until the second half of next year to begin its liftoff.  The Bank of England, which last month increased its asset-purchase program by 50 billion (with Mervyn King voting for an even larger increase), will likely refrain from tightening until early 2011.  And we believe that the ECB will also wait until 2011 to begin raising policy rates. 
      The broad dollar has declined 1 percent since your last meeting, with an appreciation against the pound and the peso only partially offsetting a sizable depreciation against the euro and the yen.  We project that the dollar will remain on a modest downward trajectory, depreciating at an annual rate of about 2 percent over the next two years. Turning to the U.S. external sector, nominal trade data for July pointed to a sharp rebound in both imports and exports.  In line with these data, as well as the projected bounceback in automotive trade and the strengthening of U.S. and foreign demand more generally, we now expect imports and exports both to expand at roughly a 20 percent pace in the third quarter.  Thereafter, rising foreign economic growth and stimulus from recent and projected future dollar depreciation should fuel export growth at an average annual rate of 8 percent through 2011, while imports are expected to grow just a touch more slowly. Beginning with the fourth quarter, we have raised our projections for import and export growth roughly 3 percentage points relative to the August Greenbook.  Although this revision in part reflects the stronger outlook for U.S. and foreign activity, we have also factored in a more aggressive judgmental rebound in trade.  As of the second quarter, real imports were down 20 percent from their previous peak and real exports were down 15 percent. This cyclical downturn was much larger than our models predicted.  With the improved global outlook, we are now writing down a bounceback that is also much larger than our models suggest, but which we believe better matches the behavior of trade during past economic recoveries. Taken together, net exports are expected to swing from a positive contribution to U.S. GDP growth of 1.6 percentage points in the second quarter to a negative 
contribution of about  percentage point on average over the forecast period, just a 
bit more negative than in our previous forecast. In sum, we are more confident about the projected recovery abroad than we were in August, but much uncertainty remains about its breadth and durability. One notable risk is that the boost from the turn in the inventory cycle may prove to be short-lived and that consumption and investment spending may remain sluggish for longer than we now anticipate. Similarly, it is possible that the recovery in global financial markets may have gotten ahead of itself, especially given continued balance sheet stresses in major financial institutions.  Finally, with high and rising unemployment in many countries, intensified protectionist pressures and increased trade barriers are an ongoing risk as well.  Thank you, and were happy to take your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our colleagues?  President Plosser.  
    MR. PLOSSER. I have a question. Dave, both you and Nathan referred to financial headwinds as one of the downsides or stresses to growth going forward.  That phrase has come up a lot over the last couple of years. As financial markets have improved, I was wondering if I could get a handle on the degree to which financial headwinds affect this forecast compared with the degree that you marked down your earlier forecasts when you also saw headwinds.  Has the picture changed for you in some way?  Im not saying that headwinds have necessarily gone away, but have they changed given the evolution of the financial markets, and, if so, how? And how is that reflected in your forecast?  And, Nathan, for the international side, the same question. MR. STOCKTON. Between the August forecast and this forecast, there really hasnt been any significant change. In our measures of financial stress, we havent learned anything more because we havent gotten another Senior Loan Officer survey to gauge bank lending. MR. PLOSSER. Since last spring, though. MR. STOCKTON: But since last spring things have changed.  Weve tried to be symmetrical in our response to the deterioration.  As you know, we were marking down our forecast by more than would be suggested by the standard interest rate, wealth, and exchange rate channels. As things have improved, weve taken some of those negative add-factors out of our spending equations and allowed spending to come back more closely to the equations than was the case in our forecast in March when we had very substantial negative adds going out through the end of the forecast horizon, but not really lessening very much over the course of this year. As things have improved, were interpreting some of the upward revisions that weve 
made to the forecast, which are very substantial for the second half of this year, as a reflection of improved overall financial conditions, some of which operate through our modelthe stock market, interest rates, the exchange ratebut others of which operate through channels that the 
  model doesnt incorporate, such as through tight bank lending and other kinds of constraints.  I dont have a quantitative number that I can just pull out of the air here, but Id say a noticeable fraction of that improvement in the incoming data probably reflects the fact that were not getting as much restraint coming from those financial conditions as we had previously thought. MR. PLOSSER. Well, how much of the improvement of your forecast, in some sense, is reflected in the diminishing of the negative add-factors that you had been putting in before and how much of it is really the model?  I think you probably gave me as close to an answer on that as Im going to get.  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON. You may recall that, as we showed in a number of Greenbooks, we were consulting some reduced-form models that incorporated measures of financial stress.  We were looking at correlating those measures of financial stress with residuals in the FRB/US equation. Theyve generally moved in a more favorable direction not uniformly, but generally in a more favorable direction.  The reason its so difficult to be very precise is that the magnitudes of that improvement differ a lot by those various measures and various models.  I think that if you look at whats happened in the second half of this year and, given that it hasnt all just occurred as an end of an inventory cycle were seeing some better final sales as well it reflects an improvement in these financial channels. MR. PLOSSER. Okay. Thank you. Nathan? MR. SHEETS. Just briefly, Id say that there have been probably three major factors that have driven the upward revisions to our forecast since the March Greenbook, which was the 
trough. One is the very surprising rebound in emerging Asia.  Economic growth in emerging Asia in the second quarter was at an annual rate of  14.5 percent. Theres no way that we would have seen that coming.  In particular, the fiscal stimulus in China came on much more quickly 
 and powerfully than we expected. A second factor thats operating on our forecast, particularly for North American countriesMexico and Canadais the markup in the U.S., which has a very powerful effect, and to some extent the markup in emerging Asia.  The third major factor has been the much more rapid improvement in global financial conditions than we would have expected. So its one of the three major factors.  Im not sure exactly how we want to allocate it across those three factors, but thats roughly the order of magnitude. One other thought that I want to articulate is that I look at these headwinds as being a factor thats weighing on economic growth and affecting our central forecast, but, in addition, I look at it as a downside riskthese headwinds may prove to be more debilitating than what we factored into our forecast.  Therefore, because of these headwinds, we have a slower pace of foreign growth, particularly in the advanced economies, than we would otherwise; we also have a distribution of risk thats more skewed to the downside than would be the case without them. MR. PLOSSER. Just one clarification: Would you characterize the improvement in financial conditions that weve seen outside the U.S. as of roughly the same order of magnitude that we witnessed in the U.S.? MR. SHEETS. Yes. 
MR. PLOSSER. And would you say that theres not a great differential between whats going on in the U.S. and whats going on in the countries that are the most important for our 
growth?  In other words, would you say that theyve improved by roughly the same order of magnitude that we have? MR. SHEETS. I would say yes, by a similar order of magnitude, but with the footnote that perhaps the headwinds in some of the emerging-market economies are not as great because their financial institutions have not been as affected by this crisis. 
 MR. PLOSSER. Thank you very much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn, you had a two-hander? 
MR. KOHN. I was going to make the last point that Nathan just made.  We heard it from the BIS. I think that some of the emerging-market economies felt that their financial markets 
were coming back very quickly, and inflows of capital were resuming and, if anything, they were beginning to get concerned about rising asset prices. I guess this applies to Australia as well to 
the emerging-market economies in Asia. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Dave, this is probably more of an observation than a question. The alternative scenarios often present very interesting possibilities, and two that caught my eye this time were, one, the earlier liftoff and, two, greater disinflation.  These are diametrically opposed.  On the one hand, early liftoff has the inflation rate going to 2.8 percent in 2013, whereas greater disinflation has it at 0 percent during that time frame.  Looking at the confidence intervals, theyre both outside of 90 percent during those time periods, so I take it you dont see either of those as particularly likely.  But I guess the question is:  When can we know that we can take one of these off the table? What type of explanation would you be looking for there? MR. STOCKTON.  I suspect it will be a while before that occurs.  I think what were trying to illustrate is that thinking about the evolution of inflation expectations going forward is critical, and we dont have a very good grasp in the current environment of what might be driving those inflation expectations. Now, the accelerationist Phillips curvethe faster, greater disinflation scenario basically follows pretty closely the kind of disinflation you might get out of a backward-looking 
    Phillips curve that fits the data, though not perfectly, over the past with some reasonable degree of accuracy.  But implicit in that is a very substantial decline in inflation expectations.  So the staff has been surprised that weve gone through a year in which the unemployment rate has risen as rapidly as it has, and weve really seen no signs that inflation expectations are breaking to the downside. On the other hand, theres the earlier liftoff.  A number of you have expressed concerns that, given the current setting of policy, or the size of the balance sheet, inflation expectations could be unleashed to the upside.  So that scenario considers what happens if we get a faster recovery in a world in which policy is not being tightened aggressively.  Specifically, could you get some significant upward shift in inflation expectations? It seems possible. I think youre right that we dont see either of those two extreme outcomes as the most likely, but I dont see any alternative other than to monitor very carefully whats happening on the inflation expectation side and, going forward, obviously to look at all of the price and wage data and so forth that would be important.  But Id consider expectations to be pretty central to that process. MR. EVANS. Okay. Thanks. Very well done. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. I have a question for Nathan regarding the dollar, and it relates to your tracking the tone of the market over the intermeeting period.  Yes, the dollar has stabilized in the last few days, but two or three weeks ago it was under pretty severe pressure.  I know its a tremendous exaggeration, but one begins to think about the dollar in a rout of some kindthe markets really selling off stronglyand, at least in theory, that could produce some response on 
  our part. How do you follow and think about the dollar and, as I call it, the tone of the market? Are you in touch with people in the market, or are we just tracking it more quantitatively? MR. SHEETS. Let me give some background.  From July of 2008 through early March of this year, the broad index of the dollar appreciated by about 20 percent.  Since early March, the dollar has given back about two-thirds of that strength.  The story that weve toldand I think it continues to be the most compelling storyis that that appreciation of the dollar was driven by a sharp increase in risk aversion and risk appetite as people moved en masse into Treasuries; then, over the last six months, as conditions have improved, theres been an unwinding of some of those risk-related flows, and the dollar has, accordingly, depreciated.  Weve also seen rather marked appreciations of a number of emerging market economy exchange rates, which would be consistent with the story that folks are more comfortable taking on risk. Now, specifically over the intermeeting period, we continue to hear this story about increased risk aversion. A lot of attention was paid to the bilateral rate with the eurothe dollar did fall quite a bit over the intermeeting period against the eurobut there was an offset to that due to an appreciation against the pound and against the Mexican peso.  So all in all, the overall move was relatively limited.  Nevertheless, tone is tone, and we continue to pay attention to it.  I have to say that I firmly believe that the dollar is traded in a market, and sometimes its going to go up and sometimes its going to go down. Ultimately, if the United States pursues sound policies, in my view, there will be attractive investment opportunities here, and that will support the dollar over the medium term.  But its our responsibility to make sure that those sound and strong policies are being put in place. So all in all, Im not too concerned so far.  But its something that we have to monitor 
  very closely, and we need to pay attention to what were hearing.  Why is the dollar falling? Is it a lack of confidence in U.S. policymakers, particularly on the fiscal side? You hear murmurs from time to time that thats a concern.  So the fiscal situation is certainly something thats weighing on the dollar. But, why is it going down? Its the tone of U.S. policies, and its imperative that U.S. policies be able to deliver an array of investment opportunities so that well be attractive for international investors. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Nathan, I think its worth pointing out, though, that the behavior of the yields on Treasuries is a little bit inconsistent with this whole story and gives us something of a puzzle. MR. SHEETS. Indeed. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, if I can, I just want to compliment the presenters.  Over the last five years the quality of these presentations gets better and better.  I particularly want to tip my hatno offense Daveto Nathan, because the understanding of these global interlinkageswithout taking anything away from your predecessorsis far more erudite than it 
was before. I much appreciate it. My question is about productivity. I would expect that globalization would have an impact on enhancing the productivity of our own economy here at home, and I deduce from listening to my corporate interlocutors that, indeed, they have been driving to achieve greater productivity as they have worked their way through this recession.  I infer from the numbers I get from my staff that, indeed, productivity has held up rather well throughout this recession and, in fact, perhaps better than it has in previous U.S. recessions.  So my question is:  How does this affect your outlook for the pace of recovery and for inflation, if my assumption is correct? 
MR. STOCKTON. In terms of the productivity in the United States, we have been surprised in the first half of this year by its strength.  Our interpretation was largely that, as things started to collapse late last year, firms were a bit slow to cut payrolls.  Even though those cuts were huge, they were, in fact, fairly modest, relative to the size of the output declines, so we got a little cyclical downswing in productivity.  Since the first half of this year, firms have been exceedingly aggressive at cutting costs and extracting higher productivity gains.  In this forecast, were interpreting that as firms squeezing their work forces currently very hard and as being unlikely to let up quickly on that. But we do think theres going to be a gradual return.  Productivity is now probably above what we think the structural trend would be, and there will be some return to that structural trend slowly through a slowdown in the growth of productivity going forward. Firms wont be able to continue to extract the 4, 5, and 6 percent increases in productivity that theyve gotten in recent quarters; its likely to slow down to more like 1 percent. Thats an important risk in the outlook, because its clear that if, in fact, we were to have another year or two of gains in productivity that average close to 4 percent, we would be looking at something that looked more like a jobless recovery.  Even though GDP growth might look reasonably well sustained, it would be with less employment growth and a higher unemployment rate than is incorporated in the baseline forecast.  Why havent we put that into the baseline forecast? At this point I think thats a serious issue and one that were going to have to confront if, in fact, productivity stays as high as it has been recently.  I guess were just reluctant at this point to interpret whats happened over the course of the past two years as a big, positive supply shock to the U.S. economy. Its possible theres some sort of X-efficiency operating where businesses are under incredible pressure, and theyll learn to do things differently, and theyll 
   continue to learn to do things more effectively in the future.  But right now, I think were staying agnostic about whether this is a negative or positive supply shock.  We resisted marking down our potential output a whole lot when the crisis first began and people were talking about a big negative supply shock. In retrospect, I think that still was a pretty good call, but were also reluctant to think that were going to get a big increase in sustained productivity growth going forwardbut its possible. And I think a jobless recovery thats generated through both faster productivity and maybe somewhat longer work weeks for workers is a real risk to the outlook. MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Other questions?  (No response.) Okay, seeing none, why dont we begin our economic go-round? And President Lockhart, youre the leadoff hitter. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First I have just a quick comment to Dave Stockton. Because of our trade policy, chicken entrails could back up in Georgia, and if you want to change your policy on that, we can help.  [Laughter] MR. STOCKTON. Ive got to take a look, I guess. MR. LOCKHART. Much like the Greenbook, my views have moved in the direction of greater optimism since the last Committee meeting in August.  The incoming data have been a 
little stronger than were anticipated then.  At this late September juncture, I think the picture can be characterized as improving, but still with very mixed vital signs, and the outlook is somewhat more optimistic but tempered by awareness that this is an economy powered by a large number of government supports.  I agree with all who are declaring that a technical recovery is under way, but it is a tentative recovery, not well established.  Even with the improving data, I think there is substantial uncertainty around the question of whether the recovery has its own legs or is 
 propelled by transitory government programs.  Governor Tarullo in the last meeting talked about a relapse scenario. I see the economy as still vulnerable to relapse. Over the last two weeks, our Sixth District contacts provided a lot of support for this view of the current reality. Sixth District realtors and homebuilders reported that the first-time homebuyer subsidy noticeably boosted new home sales and construction of moderately priced properties. The cash-for-clunkers program provided a big lift to Southeast auto dealers and cut deeply into new car inventories. In response to the Boards request, our regional executives contacted six state budget officials.  They told us that the stimulus money, as intended, has helped support construction activity, but it represents spending that would have been cut or funded by running down rainy day funds. This input supports the view that stimulus spending is mainly eliminating a negative in the outlook. In this contact cycle involving directors and other business leaders, we tried to probe their sense of factors critical to transitioning from government support to sustained growth based on private demand. Our business contacts said that the inventory drawdown is slowing but may not be followed by an increase even as sales increase.  As the Chairman pointed out at the last meeting, in the near term, inventories dont have to rise to improve economic growth, they just have to fall more slowly. Nonetheless, were hearing claims on the part of some businesspeople of permanent adjustments to inventory requirements and businesses.  Apart from a modest rise in back-to-school spending, general merchandise retailers reported continuing restrained consumer demand.  Transport firms reported very little in the way of increased activity, and the Sixth District survey of purchasing managers reveals a drop in new orders and production after more promising numbers in July. 
 As regards employment, we heard that layoffs have subsided, but there is no indication yet that firms anticipate hiring.  In summary, the nascent optimism expressed by my contacts just before the last FOMC meeting has been supplanted with unease over the economy as the influence of public support programs diminishes. We are revising up our third-quarter GDP estimate and are inclined to do the same for the fourth quarter, but in comparison with the Greenbook, I remain much less bullish about 2010 and 2011. There are reasons at this juncture to question whether the economy will have healed 
enough for a significant expansion of private demand.  I would cite several factors likely to weigh on the economy through the medium term:  high unemployment, cautious business investment, diminished consumer finance, the potential drag on the banking system from 
commercial real estate, the slow repair of the banking system, and slow-moving adjustments, such as intersectoral labor movements. Regarding prices, the incoming data show disinflation to be more persistent and more broad-based than the Atlanta bank put in its last forecast submission.  I think these disinflation 
trends bear watching, but at the moment, I still judge inflation risks to be roughly balanced. As regards growth, the incoming data have clearly been more positive, and I would judge the balance of risks to be more balanced than was my view in August.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business conditions in the Third District continue to indicate generally sluggish activity, and nonresidential investment remains soft.  Nevertheless, a number of positive trends have begun to emerge.  Our September Business 
Outlook Survey index of general activity came in quite a bit stronger than it did in August.  The 
    gain was primarily driven by increases in shipments. Its hard to parse out what part of this increase in shipments was due to drawn down inventories and what part was new production.  Most likely it was some of both.  This rise in the index seems consistent with the general signals of improvement in manufacturing coming from other regions of the country, even Richmond. Prices paid and received by manufacturers in our region seem to have firmed a bit, as well. The BOS current prices paid and current prices received indexes have all been positive for the last two months.  In fact, the index for prices expected to be paid six months from now will increase to a number over 40, a very high number.  Manufacturers thus seem to be more attuned to the prospects of higher prices than falling prices.  These data might mitigate some of our 
concerns about the risk of deflation or deflationary expectations taking hold. As in the nation as a whole, employment has continue to fall in our three-state area, though the pace of decline has lessened somewhat, as it has in the nation.  The BOS future 
employment index rose in September and has been positive for five consecutive months.  Evidence is mounting that the employment level in the three-state area is at or near the bottom. Overall, conditions in the Third District look slightly better than they were six weeks ago, and signs are pointing to a gradual strengthening of economic activity in the coming months.  On the national level, the data we have received since our last meeting are indicative of an economy where recovery is gradually taking hold, and it now appears that the worst of this recession is quite likely behind us. We are, in my view, in the midst of that transition period from contraction to expansion. The level of employment is still depressed, but, given the trends in job-loss and job-finding rates, it seems to me that we can begin to expect employment to increase and growth to return in the near term.  The signs of financial stress that also concerned us so much this time last year have greatly abated, as weve discussed. 
 While these indicators are not all back to their pre-crisis levels, they are about where I would expect, given the current state of the economy and economic conditions more broadly.  The bottom line is that current economic conditions are much better than they were, and they are better than what we and many private-sector forecasters were expecting just a few months ago.  They underpin a substantial upward revision in near-term GDP forecasts both from the Greenbook and from many private-sector forecasters. However, I remain highly skeptical of the staffs forecast regarding inflation, which, by and large, has been unaffected by the upward revisions to growth in their forecast.  In particular, I continue to see stronger inflationary pressures over the next few years than is implicit in the Greenbook forecast. Many other forecasters also see more inflation than is in the Greenbook.  
For example, the Greenbook 2010 CPI forecast is below both the average and the median CPI 
forecast among the fifty-two forecasters in the September Blue Chip consensus.  I think we need to consider seriously that there are upside risks to inflation, particularly to the staffs forecast of inflation, when we think about policy. Let me discuss why I have some concerns about the inflation outlook. First, its quite clear from the staffs write-up that forecasted inflation paths depend importantly on inflation expectations, as Dave Stockton mentioned.  With those expectations well anchored, estimates of economic slack going forward become virtually the sole determinant of the path of inflation in the forecast.  The forecast anchors those expectations at 2 percent, which is lower than the readings of inflation expectations that we have been receiving.  In particular, while they seem to be anchored, longer-term expectations of inflation as measured by surveys are still in the 3 
percent range. My own view on longer-term inflation expectations is closer to the publics, as reflected in those various surveys, than the staffs. 
 The dependence of the staffs inflation outlook on inflation expectations remaining anchored over the forecast horizon brings to the fore my second concern with the Greenbook outlook on inflation. In my way of thinking, expectations of future inflation will ultimately depend on the publics expectation about the future path of monetary stimulus.  In the Greenbook forecast, the funds rate is held constant at least through the end of 2011 and probably into 2012, while the public seems to believe well be raising the funds rate by the middle of next year.  Clearly, there is more monetary stimulus built into the Greenbook forecast than the public currently expects. If we were to endow the public with this knowledge, I seriously doubt that inflation expectations will stay near 2 percent.  Thus, the Greenbook assumption of longer-term expectations being anchored at 2 percent over the forecast horizon seems to me at odds with this divergence between the markets expectation of policy and the proposed policy path in the Greenbook. Inflation expectations could rise in this context and could easily overwhelm the effects of economic slack that the Greenbook relies so heavily upon for its forecast. My third concern is the fact that the model underlying the Greenbook forecast does not appear to depend explicitly on forecasts of liquidity or other quantities in the banking system, such as forecasts of excess reserves, required reserves, or loans. And despite the results of the consultation with banks that we heard about earlier regarding the high reserve balances and the simulation exercise, it seems only a matter of time before those huge reserves in our banking system begin to flow out into the economy, particularly with growth rates at the level that they are. And that time may come sooner than many people think, given the upward revisions in our forecast. Needless to say, this outflow will not have an immediate effect on current inflation, but expectations of inflation may become more sensitive to such a rapid increase in liquidity.  Nevertheless, the outflow will undoubtedly create the preconditions for an eventual rise in 
    inflation expectations and inflation.  We need to be prepared to soak up those excess reserves, as weve been discussing. Of course, knowing when to raise rates and when to reverse course is always a challenge, but it will be more difficult in this complex environment, as we are near the zero bound.  That brings me to my fourth concern.  While I believe that we have a range of tools to control excess reserves and reserves in general, including interest rates on reserves, asset sales, and some of the other techniques we talked about this afternoon, I think we still have some work to do to figure out what the right metrics are that we need to be looking at that will signal to us when the time is right. For instance, as I noted in my question to Bill English, I find it curious that Treasury yields fell over this intermeeting period, given the better-than-expected economic data.  A staff memo on high reserve balances noted that at least one respondent adjusted their reserve balances downward, and another was getting ready to make adjustments.  Could these yields be a result of downward pressure from cash equivalents to induce reserve demand to equal reserve supply? Yields abroad fell, too, but foreign central banks are also providing high levels of liquidity.  What implications does this have for the increase in reserves that will follow on the heels of our increased MBS purchases? What implications does it have for inflation expectations?  Is a small rise in the inflation compensation in five-year forwards over the past few weeks a precursor to that in the near future? My final concern has to do with the reduction in the Treasurys SFP balances and how this Committee plans to address that.  The staff estimates that the reduction in the SFP program will add about $200 billion in excess reserves to our balance sheet.  If we choose not to sterilize this expansion in reserves, I think this additional source of stimulus will add upside risks to 
inflation. Even if one believes that the reduction in the SFP program is temporary, as the balance 
 sheet projections assume, there doesnt seem to be any reason for us not to sterilize this increase by reducing our own LSAP program. When and if the SFP rises againand Im not sure we want to encourage it to rise again, for that matter, from an independence point of viewwe can alter our approaches if we deem it appropriate.  The amount of stimulus we apply to the economy should remain the decision of this Committee and not be passive or be choices made at the 
Treasury. The bottom line for me is this.  Given the amount of stimulus thats in the forecast, given the size of the balance sheet and excess reserves, given the uncertainty regarding our ability to know when to act, I largely see only upside risks to inflation relative to the latest Greenbook forecast. Based on these concerns about the forecasted paths of inflation, my views on appropriate policy are fundamentally different from those underlying the policy assumptions in the Greenbook. Maintaining a funds rate so close to zero for so many years, in my view, can only reignite significant inflation. Moreover, given the lags between policy actions and the surfacing of inflation, we will have to act well before inflation pressures become evident.  Otherwise we will be too late, risking both inflation and our credibility.  I believe we could have 
helped our own cause by adopting an explicit inflation target, but I fear we have missed the opportunity to advance that initiative when deflation fears were more widespread among the public and Congress.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The change in the Greenbook forecast for this meeting was really quite striking.  There were marked improvements in consumer spending, equipment and software, and residential investment for the remainder of the year, and it is notable to me that the improvement is carried through over the forecast horizon.  The turn in 
housing, for example, extends beyond the expiration of the homebuyer credit.  I havent been at this long, but I havent seen many revisions this large.  It strikes me that they are well supported by the data weve seen since the last meeting. Almost every indicator has surprised to the upside, and, taken together, they paint a picture that looks more like the beginning of the recovery than an economy trying to find where the bottom is. There are abundant reasons for caution, however, as one would expect at this stage in the business cycle. Perhaps chief among these is the labor market, which does look like its trying to find a bottom. We have seen definite improvement in the rate of change in employment, but I would feel more comfortable if the weekly claims numbers were falling a bit faster.  I think uncertainty about the labor market poses obvious questions about how hardy consumer spending is going to be in the next few quarters. Uncertainty about compensation growth poses similar questions. The Greenbook has marked up its forecast here as well, based on the notion that the weakness weve seen represents a one-time level adjustment, and that strikes me as quite plausible, but it will be great to see that in the numbers. The picture in the Fifth District is broadly similar to the national outlook, and I describe it as signs of improvement tempered by pervasive caution.  Our manufacturing index, which five months ago was the first among the regional surveys to venture into positive territory, held steady this month at 14.  Of particular note, the employment component moved into positive territory for the first time this month, as did expectations of manufacturing employment six months ahead. While our services index remained in negative territory also, overall it has also shown some recent recovery, especially on the retail side, where sales revenue and shopper 
traffic showed big improvements.  Service sector wages, both retail and nonretail, also showed their first positive reading since the beginning of the recession.   
  The anecdotal information from around the District also has a cautious tone amid signs of improvement.  Suppliers of auto components report a significant uptick in industry demand.  A large packaging manufacturer reported a surprising surge in August sales.  Other contacts, however, report delays in investment projects due to uncertainty about the economic and political climate.  Commercial real estate continues to soften.  Contacts expect construction to be lower for the next two years, with the exception of the Washington area, where several federal agencies are embarking on building projects, apparently.  One large electric utility reports slower hiring because their current workers are staying on rather than retiring as they had planned. On inflation, I agree with the Greenbooks assessment that the relative stability in the core is due largely to the stability of expectations.  It depends, in turn, of course, on the stability of expectations about future policy, as President Plosser pointed out, and that makes the large discrepancy that he commented on between market expectations and the Greenbooks assumption regarding the funds rate something of a problem.  Personally, I think the market expectations are a bit closer to the mark. Whats happening in banking and financial markets since the last meeting is pretty striking, too, I think. At a time when economic reports have generally surprised on the upside, interest rates have trended downthe six-month rate, for example, went from 28 basis points to 20. You would have thought that rates would have risen instead, in response to the good economic news.  Bill English was discussing interpretations of this downward shift in the yield curve. I would point out we were buying all across the spectrum, so the combination of our purchases and quantitative easingsome mix of those twocould easily have been operative. At our last two meetings, Id been suggesting that we may start to see quantitative easing effects when our asset purchases completely displace short-term liquidity borrowing to the 
   banking system.  But over the past intermeeting period, our asset purchases have been only partially offset by reductions in short-term borrowing, if you take this point of view.  Our security holdings increased $191 billion, and our reserve balances increased $101 billion.  And in comparison over the previous intermeeting period, our security holdings increased by $149 billion, but reserve balances actually shrank.  Combining the behavior of borrowing with the increase in reserve balances and the decrease in interest rates suggests that we might already be seeing some quantitative easing as a result of our asset purchases. Id note that, in the period from February to May of this year, we had a similar increase in reserve holdings and a similar decrease in interest ratesthe six-month rate, for example, went from 46 basis points down to 30and at that time bank demand for reserves seemed to be 
increasing; an anecdotal report suggested that preparation for the announcement of the stress test results, or the conclusion of the stress test, was inducing banks to build up bigger liquidity buffers.  This only partially offsetting effect that we might be seeing could occur if some banks are using us for wholesale funding rather than as a source of just getting the reserve balances they need. Some short-term borrowing is for up to three months, and that means delays in adjustments in response to our asset purchases, and for both those reasons, banking system borrowings might not shrink dollar for dollar with our asset purchases. Therefore, it looks to me as if theres a good chance quantitative easing may have actually begun since the last meeting.  But even if that is not true, were certain to cross that line soon, because the Desk has made $131 billion in MBS purchases that havent settled yet, and the supplementary financing program is going to run down by about $185 billion.  So thats $316 billion in additional reserves, even if we dont purchase any more MBS, that are going to be added to the banking system. 
 From my perspective, every additional purchase from here on out represents additional monetary stimulus, and its as if we were continuing to cut interest rates.  If you look at Bill Englishs first chart, its going to take bank reserves well outside of its range over the last year or so. Now, if we were working with interest rates, and the fed funds rate were, say, 1 percent and we had the same macro data up until this meeting that wed seen, I have a hard time thinking we would cut rates, given the improvement weve just seen in the economy.  I realize thats open to debate, and we can discuss that.  But because of that, Im not sure how I feel about additional MBS purchases, that is, whether its a good idea to add that stimulus right now.  Im looking forward to hearing peoples views about the economy and these MBS purchases.  But in any event, I think we should avoid making any commitments at this meeting to the amount of asset purchases, particularly for our agency MBS.  We havent made any public commitment so far.  Our statements have always said up to, and theyve always said that were monitoring the size and composition of our balance sheet and will make adjustments to our credit and liquidity programs as warranted, right near the end of the statement.  I think we could get to the next meeting and decide additional monetary stimulus is unwarranted, and I think in that case we could want to finish up our agency MBS program before we get to the full amount.  So thats where I am, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data since the last meeting give us more confidence that the economy is now recovering from the recession and the second half of this year will have positive economic growth.  But I expect near-term growth to be insufficient to make much progress on the very weak labor markets.  Most heartening have been clear signals were receiving indicating a bottoming out in housing markets.  Like many markets, 
  Boston has seen some increases in housing pricing, particularly for homes that are attractive to buyers looking to use the governments first-time homebuyer tax credit. The disinflation that the Greenbook has been forecasting is being borne out by the data.  Core PCE inflation for the past year is 1.4 percent, significantly below the previous year and well below where most of us expect the inflation rate to settle in the longer run.  According to the Survey of Professional Forecasters, the mean probability that the core PCE inflation is below 1 percent in 2010 is 50 percent, with only a 12 percent mean probability attached to a core PCE inflation exceeding 2.4 percent. While some market analysts cite the expansion of the Federal Reserve balance sheet as being inflationary, I do not believe that this poses much of a short-run risk. While we do not have recent historical experience in the United States with the effect of rapid growth in the central bank balance sheet, the experience in Japan is instructive.  Even with their substantial quantitative easing program, the Bank of Japan has been fighting deflation rather than inflation for the past decade.  Despite the rapid growth in bank reserves in Japan, the banking system was shrinking as banks reduced lending to satisfy capital constraints.  It seems 
unlikely that the expansion of the Federal Reserve balance sheet will have near-term inflationary implications for reasons similar to those in Japan.  Despite the buildup in U.S. bank reserves, bank lending remains constrained and is likely to be capital constrained for some time.  Thus, like the Greenbook, I expect that lower labor costs and the substantial slack in the economy will continue to generate disinflation, and, thus, over the next two years, we will likely be moving further below my inflation target of 2 percent.  Discussions with bankers in New England are consistent with the data showing continuing significant declines in lending.  Their biggest concern is with commercial real estate loans, where falling prices are making banks increasingly reluctant to lend.  One very large 
  builder highlighted the fact that, although construction costs and the costs of labor have declined, those cost reductions have not kept pace with the fall in prices of existing buildings. Bankers are concerned with how commercial real estate loans will be treated at their next exam.  The mounting commercial real estate problems, along with nonperforming loans that are growing faster than reserves at many banks, make it increasingly unlikely that we will see much improvement in credit availability from banks in the coming year. While the real economy is improving, the robustness of private-sector growth once the government programs wind down is still uncertain and poses additional downside risk.  More importantly, the unemployment rate is likely to remain uncomfortably high and inflation well below my target for the next several years.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District, retail sales remain anemic.  Weakness in energy due to lower natural gas prices continues to be a drag on the Texas, New Mexico, and Louisiana economies, and commercial real estate remains mired in significant distress.  But there are some positive numbers that have been reported.  Private-sector jobs grew 
in July, and then pulled back a little bit in August.  Initial unemployment claims continued to decline. There are signs of improvement in the temporary staffing market.  Reflecting the activity that Nathan reported, exportsand Texas is the largest exporting staterose in July for the second consecutive month; theyre up slightly in Q2.  Existing home sales are up through July. Theres actually a slight pickup in home construction as new home inventory levels 
stabilize. And we have a leading index that was up on all components, making positive 
contributions at the last measurement. 
  Now, realizing that it may not be the case that as goes Texas, so goes the galaxy or so goes the globe, still, there are some glimpses of sunlight that come through from our anecdotal soundings and from the CEOs that I have talked tothe list of which I provide you before every meeting, Mr. Chairman.  Distillate consumption, which is strongly correlated with industrial activity, has picked up at least slightly.  And I note that electricity generation is also up slightly, which is a positive.  On the consumer side, Mastercards internal data were positive in terms of sales activity for the week of September 7, for the first time since October 30, 2008.  The broadcasters report that advertising is creeping back up.  In part, this is Ed Whitacres ego. Theres also political advertising on health care, but, more generally, its getting away from the trial lawyers and the lesser advertisers that we have seen and moving toward more general, normal, economic activity.  The semiconductors report a pickup in demand, which I find quite interesting. According to Texas Instruments, for example, in the first quarter customers actually reduced their original orders by 7 percent.  In the second quarter, they shipped 31 percent over their original order base, which indicates a rush to cover either inventory shortfalls or perhaps demandtheyre not sure which.  And, as of last night, their shipments in the third quarter are exceeding the original orders by 29 percent.  And, lastly, an odd positive to the recession, is that Wal-Mart reports that pilferage or internal theft is down 20 percent for fear of people losing their jobs. Despite those positive indicators and the aggregate data which we have heard presented by others and at this table, I would summarize the mood of my interlocutors as being wary of the purported recovery. They see some improvement in the statistics that they read about elsewhere, 
but, based on their own experience, they doubt them.  Some cotton to our outlook at the Dallas Fed, which is for a checkmark-shaped recovery, with less growth, as President Lockhart pointed 
 out, in 2010 and 2011 than the staff are forecasting here at the Board.  But I heard from more than I hoped that theyre managing for what I would call a W-shaped recovery.  And if theyre wrong, theyll be relieved. More than once I heard what I consider a new management bias described as being based on process improvement or cost take-out or margin repair.  This is the kind of nomenclature that now is ubiquitous amongst McKinsey and Bain consultants, who up until last summer were flogging techniques to enhance top-line improvement through pricing power. Our own measure at the Dallas Fed of global capacity utilization shows record lows.  It indicates that for some time incremental demand will be met by utilizing a greater share of existing capital rather than investing in new equipment or buildings.  And I cant find a single sector where a leading CEO is budgeting to do anything other than to contain costs and only commit to vital and minimal cap ex in 2010. So, Mr. Chairman, thats how it looks from a microeconomic perch.  Its undoubtedly imperfect, but I think its illustrative.  Theres a disconnect between the way that the women and men who are managing the businesses of the United States view the economy and the aggregate data. And I dont know how we will join that disconnect, but its clearly there.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Whats the difference between a checkmark recovery and a V recovery? MR. FISHER. The slope of the right side, from my perspective.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see. 
MR. FISHER. Its a Nike swoosh. [Laughter]  This actually goes to the point that President Plosser made, and Im going to take advantage of your question.  Of course. Thank 
 you for asking. We are eliminating a lot of negatives, as President Plosser said.  Were beginning to accentuate some positives.  We do have a snapback.  We had a very sharp decline.  The question is the rate of growth going forward.  And given the way businesses are managing and structuring their budgets going forward, the way they are wringing productivityI think those are your words, Dave out of their workers, I expect that final demand will be somewhat anemic.  So its not a sharp V. And going further out, after you come through the check on the checkmark, I expect a slower rate of growth. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You dont go with a square root sign, though.  [Laughter] MR. FISHER. I have been informed its something that I fear.  Actually, Mr. Chairman, I think this is a problem.  Our tail risks are almost undefinable.  We could have that.  We could also have the kind of explosive growth that Dave was talking about earlier.  And I would like to hear, as you know, more decision tree analysis as to how we would respond from a policy 
perspective under all three scenarios.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy performed somewhat better than the U.S. economy as a whole during the summer.  According to our calculations, 16 metropolitan statistical areas in the Eighth District actually had slightly positive JuneJuly job growth. As you know, the U.S. remained negative as a whole, of course.  Some of this reflected auto production recalls, but generally I took it as a positive sign for the Eighth District economy.  In fact, job growth has been less negative in 2009, generally, for the Eighth District versus the nation. However, anecdotal information does not line up with the national forecast for growth in the second half of 2009, and here I would agree completely with President Fisher.  A general 
    comment from directors and business contacts is:  Theres official talk about recovery, but we dont see recovery in our businesses.  And were not planning on recovery, and were hunkering down. I find that somewhat worrisome, because it is ubiquitous, and because were already at the end of the third quarter. I would have expected to hear more positive anecdotes coming from the JulyAugustSeptember period. It could be that these contacts are not seeing a return to previous levels. Its always a little hard to interpret when youre talking to businesspeople.  They may only be seeing stabilization at a low level, and theyre thinking back to the good old days when they had much higher levels.  I did get just a few firms reporting that theyre more optimistic now and are seeing better business conditions, to the point where they might consider additional cap ex. One firm was in health care, and another was in transportation. On the national outlook, I agree that the U.S. economy is poised to return to growth after a year of declining GDP.  I am anxious, as many of you probably are, to actually see positive growth as opposed to just market anticipation of that growth or macro forecasts of that growth.  The current scenario does seem quite a bit stronger than some of the darker scenarios from earlier this year when we took aggressive policy actions.  I hope that what were seeing is a durable bottoming out in housing, and I do find it heartening that the recovery internationally has been stronger than expected. I was one who was consistently worried that the global nature of this recession might present special problems for the FOMC, but I think that worry has subsided somewhat, as the bounceback in Europe and emerging Asia and elsewhere has been very strong, or stronger than expected. I remain worried about inflation expectations over the medium term.  Of course, we have lots of surveys and market-based measures of these expectations.  They seem to be well anchored. However, Im worried that these may not be that informative.  I think the typical 
market participants or survey respondents are effectively saying that the policy looks a little bit crazy, but they kind of trust us to get the right inflation in the end.  And so they say, Okay, I will predict 2 percent, even though I cant really see how you guys are going to do it.  I think that is whats going on with a lot of the market-based measures and the survey measures.   Let me just follow up on this.  It seems to me that people who hang around central banking and financial markets really dont know what to think about the unconventional policies that our Committee is pursuing. And Im not sure, really, that we know ourselves what to make of these policies, because we dont have models or a lot of experience with them.  So the situation is that informed opinion is all over the mapyou do see that when you talk to people in financial markets.  I think that creates a risky situation for the FOMC.  It may appear, based on surveys, that expectations are well anchored, but its masking a real uncertainty thats out there.  Some people think there might be a lot of deflation, and some people think there might be a lot of inflation, and theyre not sure what to think. In conjunction with this, Im concerned that current policies do not have a clear state-contingent aspect to them.  The last 25 years of macroeconomics has argued that good optimal policy reacts to shocks, reacts to the incoming information on the economy.  The canonical Taylor rule is one way to do that.  But no matter what policy you want to pursue, you would want to have the state-contingent character to it.  How this reaction occurs needs to be communicated to markets.  That informs the market pricing and the interest rates today, so it does matter what people think your future policy is going to be, and that means some kind of mapping to how you are going to react to future shocks.  Those expectations, then, complete the equilibrium, and thats how the equilibrium is supported. 
   Im concerned that were not doing that effectively right now.  At this meeting, were seeing that the outlook has improved substantially over what we thought earlier in the year.  But were going to largely continue, based on previous decisions, without very much explicit reaction to the change in circumstances.  That doesnt sound like the optimal state-contingent policy we need. And were not communicating because, I think, we dont know how we might adjust in the future.  So it strikes me that this is an area where current policy could be improved.  If we could make adjustments in that direction, I think the benefits would include a more effective program for us and better economic performance for the nation.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. On state contingency, I think I should just raise the possibility of corner solutions.  If you have a constraint, you could be up against that constraintit wouldnt be state contingent in that case.  Although we want to talk about future policy, and so on, but in terms of your actual instrument MR. BULLARD. Do you mean that were at the zero bound? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, for example. 
MR. BULLARD. Definitely at the zero bound.  Weve got other policies, though.  We could tell markets how were going to adjust.  Lets suppose we get bad news in the January 
FebruaryMarch period, and the economy didnt turn out the way we had hoped.  Markets would like to know now, if we got in that situation, how wed react.  And I just dont think were ready to tell them, but wed like to be able to tell them as part of an optimal policy. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Thats a more eloquent way of stating what I was referring to earlieror, at least, if not stating it, understanding internally how we would respond under different circumstances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast has not changed materially.  I guess we were a little ahead of the Greenbook.  We are still looking for GDP growth to average about 3 percent over the next six quarters and then pick up to a pace more noticeably above potential in 2011. Virtually all of my directors and business contacts reported continued improvement and modest firming of recent positive developments.  Clearly, the evidence that the recovery is underway is getting stronger each month.  But many contacts also offered another more guarded flavor of commentary, probably along the lines of what President Fisher said.  Now that the fear of a truly awful outcome has receded, businesses are increasingly coming to grips with the realization that, even though recovery is under way, its likely to be a slow one, with the unemployment rate remaining high for some time.  The weak labor market will weigh on their customers confidence, businesses planning, and the strength and momentum of near-term expansion.  This guardedness is a natural reaction to events.  By itself, I dont think its an independent cause for concern, but its something to be mindful of. I will just touch quickly on some of the high points from my economic reports.  Inventory restocking is clearly under way and is boosting production.  The implications for hiring are mixed.  The business segments that were hardest hit cut employment most deeply, and now we are bringing back some workers as they increase utilization.  But most others who cut less deeply are not hiring yet.  Many business contacts stated that the recoverys momentum will be most 
uncertain in the first half of 2010 following the inventory restocking.  Reports of improvements 
in financial and credit conditions were widespread.  Several contacts involved in commercial real estate markets even reported substantial progress.  All in all, my discussions seemed consistent with an economy expected to grow for 18 months at a pace of about 3 percent.  This tepid growth 
   is from the bottom of a very deep recession and leaves the unemployment rate remaining above 9 percent during this phase of the recovery. While there does not seem to be much disagreement over this outlook for the economy, I continue to be surprised by the lack of agreement over the implications of the resulting measures of resource slack for inflation. So lets see what I can add here.  I think I understand the arguments implicit in last weeks communications from Presidents Plosser and Lacker on the Bluebook policy alternatives, as well as some public commentary about resource slack.  These arguments I think of roughly like this.  First, theory says inflation is a monetary phenomenon.  I think we all agree with that. Second, resource slack has tenuous and arguable implications for inflation and is measured with great uncertainty.  And, finally, many economists reject resource slack implications because of these concerns. But its an enormous leap to ignore entirely all measures of resource slack.  Output gaps are not unique in being unobservable and difficult to measure.  Inflation expectations are very important and are equally unobservable, heterogeneous, and the measures often are in conflict.  Just look at variations in liquidity in the TIPS markets for the compensation measures that we look at. If you look carefully at the Michigan survey and think about how the survey participants respond, there are biases, the data are censored and massaged quite a lotwe know we cant get 
the levels of inflation expectations right, either.  As I looked at inflation expectations data in Part 2 of the Greenbook, the Survey of Professional Forecasters had 2.2 percent for ten years ahead, Michigan had 2.9, the TIPS at the five-year five-year had 2.9.  And these are all greater than our implicit target of 2 percent, but when I look at the charts they have been there for quite some time.  So getting the levels is really tough, and looking at changes in inflation expectations is a bit of a dodge in the same way that we take the resource slack as given when we look at it. 
  Now, of course, the signal-to-noise ratios on our measures of resource slack are normally low; that is, noise is large.  But currently all measures of slack are pointing in the same direction with large magnitudes. The unemployment rate is just about 10 percent, so the signal-to-noise ratio is much better right now.  Just as importantly, I think that without the idea of substantial resource slack, its hard to understand what has been happening to inflation and inflation expectations. Hypothetically, if the economys need for structural adjustments explains all or most of the drop in employment and output, then why arent inflation expectations very high and rising?  In that scenario, the enormous growth in the monetary base would mean monetary policy is extraordinarily accommodative.   So something else must be keeping inflation expectations reasonably stable, another unobservable factor. Is our credibility particularly high today? Our legion of critics doesnt believe that. And if I believed that resource slack was minimal, and then looked at our balance sheet, I wouldnt think so either. Although Im surprised that inflation expectations havent fallen more, I strongly suspect the reason that they have stayed moderate in the face of massive monetary easing is that the public sees equally massive amounts of resource slack and expects that slack to eliminate most price pressures. I share in calls for additional language and metrics to express the FOMCs markers on inflation pressures.  I think that those comments are right on target.  Such additional conditions 
would help guide us and communicate to the public our ability and resolve to keep inflation and inflation expectations well behaved.  But currently I dont have any hesitation in including resource slack in this list of markers.  It makes it tougher going back to my alma mater and talking to my advisors, but[laughter] Thats it. Thank you. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We all have to make sacrifices.  [Laughter] President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im much more optimistic about the nascent recovery than I have been in a long while, and I no longer see the risks around my modal forecast as asymmetrically skewed to the downside.  Over the last few months, conditions in a wide variety of financial markets have improved, and the economic news has been generally encouraging. Consumer spending appears to have bottomed out, and the inventory cycle, which is typically a key element in the transition dynamics from contraction to expansion, is now providing considerable impetus to activity.  Even the housing and manufacturing sectors, which were hardest hit during the recession, are finally showing signs of life.  To my surprise, house prices now appear to be reestablishing an upward trend.  Like the Greenbook, we have revised up our expectation for their future paths. The more positive outlook for home prices improves my confidence in the recovery for several reasons. First, the associated boost in housing wealth should have a favorable impact on consumer spending.  Second, stabilization in house prices will help put a floor on the value of housing-related securities, which, in turn, should bring more clarity to the balance sheets of banks and other financial institutions.  And, finally, a positive trajectory in future home prices is an essential element in changing the economics and the psychology of the housing market.  Homeowners who were underwater, or close to it, are more likely to put off default and avoid foreclosure if they have some renewed prospect for house-price appreciation.  And potential 
buyers who have been holding off waiting for the bottom in house prices may finally be coaxed into the market.  In effect, the feedback loop from financial conditions to the real economy may finally be switching directions, supporting growth and even creating some upside risk. 
 That said, there are also downside risks.  In addition to all of the risks surrounding commercial real estate, Im concerned that some, and possibly a lot, of the improvement weve seen in the housing sector may result from policy supports that are about to unwind; in particular the first-time homebuyer tax credit, which is set to expire at the end of November, likely boosted activity, although perhaps at the cost of pulling demand from future quarters.  And our MBS purchase program does appear to have lowered mortgage rates significantly.  I was struck by the survey evidence from the Desk of 60 basis points.  Our own estimates are a full percentage point.  Theres obviously a lot of uncertainty about what will happen when the program ends, but I certainly found it sobering to see that the dealers surveyed by the Desk anticipate that the impact of this program on mortgage rates will be fully reversed within six months. Even though I now believe that a recovery has taken hold and is likely to be sustained into 2010, my perspective on policy is importantly influenced by my expectation that it will be tepid by historical standards, leaving unemployment unacceptably high for a long time to come.  Consistent with experiences around the world following recessions caused by financial crises, I anticipate that it will take quite a while for the financial system to heal to the point that something like normal credit flows can be restored.  In addition, even if the saving rate stabilizes and consumer spending again grows, we are not apt, given damaged household balance sheets and weak labor markets, to see the exuberant spending growth that characterized the years preceding the crisis.  Moreover, I see a substantial chance that the saving rate will head higher than in the Greenbook baseline. Finally, I foresee a jobless recovery with weak employment growth and persistently high unemployment.  My business contacts uniformly report that they have implemented productivity improvements in the downturn that will permit them to hold down hiring until the recovery is very well entrenched. 
Turning to inflation, it will surprise no one around the table that I anticipate that the prospect of high unemployment for years to come is a key factor shaping the outlook.  We must, of course, be attentive to the possibility that the NAIRU has changed, and, as Ive noted in past meetings, I do think there is some evidence that the NAIRU has increased.  This round, the Greenbook edged up the staffs NAIRU estimate to 5 percent on a temporary basis, in light of the large number of permanent layoffs taking place and a possible shift in the Beveridge curve.  I could quibble with these adjustments, but any fraction of a percentage point increase in the level of the NAIRU pales in size relative to the 5 percentage point jump in the unemployment rate 
over the past two years. Under any reasonable interpretation of the evidence, both labor and product markets have a considerable amount of slack.  And the existence of a causal link between slack and resource utilization and wage and price inflation is not only theoretically sensible, its also consistent with both anecdotal and econometric evidence. To collect some anecdotal evidence, we asked all of our head office and branch directors during the intermeeting period to provide us with their assessments of the extent of slack in their industry or geographic area, and to tell us what, if any, effect such slack and other factors are having and will have on their costs and output prices going forward.  Not surprisingly, our directors uniformly report that qualified job applicants are plentiful, that voluntary quits have plummeted, and that workers are thankful to have jobs and are readily accepting lower wage increases and even wage cuts. On the price side, the directors report pervasive price-discounting.  Almost uniformly they are badgering every supplier and vendor for price reductions, and these negotiations are generally successful, with average price discounts on the order of 10 to 15 percent. 
    With respect to econometric evidence, my staff has kept our computers running overtime estimating Phillips curves.  They find that, so far in this recession, out-of-sample forecasts from a simple backward-looking Phillips curve have been right on track in predicting the decline we have seen in core PCE inflation over the past year.  This model notably outperforms a random walk or other empirical specifications that include inflation expectations and/or lagged inflation but exclude slack. It is not that the Phillips curve is perfectfar from itand, at best, a slack variable can account for only about 30 percent of the fluctuations in core inflation.  But as Jim Stock, Mark Watson, and other researchers have shown, it is the best empirical inflation forecasting framework that we have. With respect to my inflation forecast, the basic empirical Phillips curve model predicts substantial further disinflation. In contrast, the Greenbook projects very modest disinflation in core prices, under the assumption that inflation expectations will play an important role in anchoring inflation around 2 percent.  I, too, hope that inflation will not move much lower.  But theres a lot we dont know about how inflation expectations affect actual inflation and about how to measure the expectations that are relevant for price setting.  For example, our estimated finance models indicate that many of the recent fluctuations in the break-even inflation rate reflect movements in the inflation risk premiums and that inflation expectations have actually drifted down over the past year. We should, therefore, remain attentive to downside inflationary risks. I understand that at our December meeting we will have an in-depth discussion of inflation modeling and forecasting, and I look forward to that.  At our last meeting, President Stern aptly described the use of a Phillips curve to forecast inflation.  He said, It takes a model to beat a model, and I dont think we have another model in the short run.  And I agree. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I should just say that for the December meeting, the current plan is to have a presentationby Reserve Banks, I guesson inflation dynamics.  So well try to bring back the continuing education aspect of this meeting. Were well into the 6:00 hour. Thank you, everyone.  Why dont we adjourn until 9:00 a.m. tomorrow morning.  Theres a reception and a dinner, but no businessits an optional dinner for your convenience. So Ill see you at 9:00.  Thank you. [Meeting recessed] 
  September 23, 2009Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I recognize the Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you.  I was remiss yesterday in not introducing Angela OConnor, sitting next to Brian Sack, from the Markets group.  So I apologize, Angela. MS. OCONNOR. Thank you. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Welcome. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Welcome.  Good. We can continue with the economic go-round, and I have President Hoenig to lead off. MR. HOENIG. Good morning. Thank you. The Tenth District, like the rest of the nation, appears to be climbing its way out of the recession.  Weve seen some slight improvement in retail sales, our manufacturing index is up above 50, and theres clearly some improvement in our inventory situation, notably in housing, which has stabilizedin fact, were 
actually seeing some improvement.  Where we continue to struggle is, obviously, with commercial real estate, which is a big issue for us.  Our agricultural sector this year will be down, because prices are down, primarily for bumper crops.  Also, our labor markets are stable, theyre not improving. They may show some uptick, but very little, we suspect, as the economy and the region has settled out. Even our energy sector, which has been in the doldrumsas President Fisher said, because we produce a lot of natural gashas at least stabilized for now.  So were working our way out, and, I would say, in a manner similar to that for the nation as a whole. When we consider the nation and the outlook, I think that we are in recovery.  There are signs, in our region and elsewhere, of self-correcting mechanismsthe runoff in inventories, the 
rebuilding, manufacturing picking up.  Some of that is self-sustaining, hopefully, and will move us forward. As weve started this recovery, and as we look forward, there continues to be enormous stimulus that is yet to play out, both fiscal stimulus that is under way and will go through 2010 and monetary stimulus as well.  And I think thats very important to keep in mind as we look ahead. As we anticipate inflation and issues like that, I think its also important to remember that we do need to look many quarters ahead, because everything thats happening today reflects 
steps we were involved in several quarters ago, or at least in the spring.  In that regard, I think we face a challenge looking at the immediate recovery, sustaining that recovery, and then looking far enough ahead that we dont introduce new problems for ourselves.  And thats what I do 
worry about regarding inflation and other asset issues that might come up. Were going to be in a position of trying, as you say, to bring our monetary policy to a more neutral level in those quarters.  Its going to take a long time to do that.  And well be using instruments weve never used beforethat means theres going to be slippage, and that means there are going to be mistakes.  Anticipating the next discussion a little bit, as we think about first quarter, when I think there is a good chance the recovery will be sustained, I cannot help but wonder if one of our most important toolsand there is risk with every choice we makeis to do nothing in terms of buying assets that we would then almost immediately have to sterilize. On the matter of excess capacity, of course, we are just starting the recovery, so there is excess capacity. For example, a while ago, if you took a railroad in my part of the world and you asked the CEO about capacity, hed have told you that he had cars parked that would just about cross the state of Kansasand for those of you who dont know Kansas, thats a long way.  [Laughter] More recently, though, his parked cars stretch only as far as Great Bend, Kansas 
 and for those of you who dont know Kansas, thats still a long way, but less so.  So the capacity is being worked off, and thats the process thats under way.  So we have to be thinking about when the capacity will be used up compared with when our monetary policy will be in a more neutral position. Those are the hard choices I think we have, and thats why I am worried about our timing in terms of purchasing assets and continuing on that path.  So thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My business contacts in the Fourth District continue to be wary about developments in the economy.  While most businesses reported incremental gains in their output levels earlier this summer, many have already seen a tapering off of those gains. Other contacts reported that orders are fluctuating with no discernible trend. Overall, I would characterize the predominant mood of the business executives I speak with as uncertain and cautious. One of the reasons there is so much uncertainty is that the improvements that we have seen in the critical industries appear to be tied to short-term stimulus programs.  District auto sales got a clear boost from the cash-for-clunkers program, and auto production plans have 
now been increased for both the third and fourth quarters.  There is also no question that there have been ripple effects through the supply chain all the way back to orders for steel.  This increased production in autos and industries related to autos was critical to the stabilization in the Fourth District output that we reported in the latest Beige Book. But the limited gains in the industrial sector to date do lead me to think that this recovery is very fragile. Underscoring the fragility is the uncertainty about just how sustainable the demand for car sales will be into and beyond the fourth quarter.  For similar reasons, my contacts 
 in the real estate industry are concerned that sales may decline once the first-time homebuyer tax credit expires on December 1. They certainly arent complaining about the support, which is drawing in new homebuyers, yet they also report that an unusual number of sellers are renting rather than purchasing move-up houses.  One real estate executive said that, traditionally, four out of five sales are to move-up buyers, whereas he is only seeing two out of five sales to move-up buyers in the current market.  The lack of move-up purchasing has limited the impact of the first-time homebuyer programs, and move-up purchasing is going to be critical once the first-time homebuyer incentives are exhausted.  Again, the economys fragility is partly hidden by incentives, which, in this case, are scheduled to roll off later this year. Concerns such as these weighed on my outlook for economic growth, particularly in the fourth quarter. I anticipate a gradual and bumpy recovery.  My outlook does not have sustained above-trend growth until the second half of 2010, with the unemployment rate topping off at just over 10 percent early next year. Turning to inflation, two pieces of research done by my staff helped to guide my outlook.  The first is a model of inflation expectations that does not rely on TIPS to estimate inflation expectations. Instead, the model combines inflation data, nominal bond rates, survey measures of inflation expectations, and inflation swaps to construct estimates of expected inflation.  This model shows that inflation expectations remain stable from two to ten years out.  Second, my 
staff, along with the staff at the Atlanta Fed, has been examining the detailed price data by splitting the consumer price index market basket according to whether prices of goods and services are sticky or flexible.  The stickier prices appear to be a particularly informative 
measure of core inflation, in that they more reliably predict future inflation.  Our staff analysis 
  shows that the inflation rate of the goods and services with stickier prices has shifted sharply lower this year. This trend points to suppressed inflation rates for the next few quarters. These results point to some crosscurrents I see in putting together an inflation projection.  In the near term, resource slack is likely to depress core inflation numbers, while over the medium term, monetary and fiscal policies and stable inflation expectations should support an inflation trajectory toward 2 percent.  Specifically, I expect core PCE inflation to dip below 1 percent in 2010, but to increase gradually toward 2 percent in 2011. Overall, the risks to my inflation outlook remain balanced.  Regarding the risks to my outlook for economic growth, though, I think I appear to be in the small minority, because I still see the risks to growth to the downside. I am concerned that the gains that we have seen recently 
in the real economy are limited and are potentially just temporary reflections of the policy actions undertaken earlier this year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  First Vice President Lyon. MR. LYON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first address the District outlook.  Consistent with the incoming national data, the Ninth District economy is showing some signs of improvement.  For instance, survey data indicate that manufacturing activity in the Dakotas has increased and has remained steady in Minnesota.  We are seeing a modest, but nevertheless perceptible, increase in anecdotal reports of businesses plans to expand production.  Activity in the energy and mining sectors of the District economy is also showing a slight increase.  Exploration activity is up somewhat, and there are scattered reports of plans to restart idle production and expand facilities. For example, a large iron ore mine in northern Minnesota has resumed production.  The health-care sector appears to have weathered the recession relatively well. Residential construction activity appears to have stabilized, albeit at low levels.  While the 
 results vary across the District, we are now seeing some improvement in the level of home sales in various metropolitan areas. Commercial real estate, in contrast, continues to be weak.  Commercial real estate markets have been depressed by a combination of lower economic activity, rising vacancy rates, tighter credit conditions, and rapidly falling property values.  On the flip side, lower rental rates should help the profitability of businesses that need space. Despite the recent improvement in the national data, District consumer spending has been soft, with the exception of auto sales, which have been buoyed by the cash-for-clunkers program.  Anecdotal reports on same-store retail sales indicate declines of 4 to 8 percent compared with a year ago.  Across the District, our contacts report that while the number of tourists has increased, the level of tourism-related spending remains somewhat soft relative to prior norms.  In agriculture, crop development is about two weeks behind normal due to late planting and a cool summer.  An early frost could significantly reduce production, which would negatively affect food processors, ethanol plants, and ranchers.  Unemployment levels across the District, from Minnesota to Montana, remain low compared with the national average, with the most recent readings from 4.3 percent in North Dakota to 8 percent in Minnesota. Turning to the national economy, most of the incoming data remain consistent with our forecast of a near-term increase in output and subdued inflation.  A reduction in the rate of 
business inventory liquidation, firming of consumer spending, and some growth in federal spending should support the resumption of economic growth during the remainder of the year.  
Developments since the last meeting have served to reinforce this view.  The August uptick in 
retail sales, data on orders and shipments of capital goods, business sentiment, and the rise in 
sales and starts of single-family homes, are all consistent with improvement in the level of 
  economic activity.  The gradual reduction of the adverse impacts of declines in wealth should also support a rise in consumer spending. As President Stern noted in August, our forecast in recent months has been for a bit more rapid growth than in the prior Greenbook. Given the markup in the Greenbook forecast since the last meeting, our forecast and that of the Greenbook are now more closely aligned.  While the outlook has improved since the last meeting, in my view the principal risks to our forecast are to 
the downside. Going forward, the expiration of some of the government programs that have been providing support to the economy creates uncertainty in the outlook. Moreover, beyond the third quarter, the ongoing weakness in labor markets, particularly the very low rate of gross hiring by private firms, raises questions about where household earnings growth will come from and where workers, who are no longer building houses, strip malls, and SUVs, will be reemployed.  Prolonged uncertainty about job prospects and tight consumer credit markets could lead consumers to reverse course and cut spending this year or next, and this, in turn, could feed another round of production and inventory cuts.  While I believe that these risks can be avoided, I will feel significantly more confident in this view with a few more months of positive developments. Consistent with the Greenbook forecast, I expect improvements in employment will be gradual, and I believe that this is the inevitable byproduct of a necessary process of resource reallocation.  As such, I believe that, at least to some extent, we must be prepared simply to allow this process to unfold, recognizing that it may not be particularly responsive to incremental additional stimulus.  Despite the improved outlook for economic activity, I expect inflation expectations to remain well anchored and agree with the Greenbook forecast that inflation will 
remain within acceptable bounds.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy is clearly doing better.  All indications are that we will have a pretty strong bounce in activity during the second half of the year3+ percent annualized real GDP growth seems likely, and the risks over the near term are probably to the upside, I think, of the Greenbook forecast, because inventory cycles can be very powerful. That said, I still think it is very premature to declare victory for several reasons.  First, a good portion of the growth will come from the swing in the pace of inventory accumulation rather than strength in final demand.  Second, the banking system is still impaired.  Bank credit outstanding has been declining. Small businesses and commercial real estate sectors are particularly starved for credit, and that is likely to continue for some time.  Third, payrolls are still falling, and the unemployment rate is still rising.  Fourth, we dont know how households will respond to the sharp drop in net worth at a time that household debt burdens remain high.  I can imagine a combination of higher household saving and increased labor market participation as baby boomers postpone retirement.  The first would damp demand; the second would raise the amount of slack in the labor market.  Fifth, we are already in the process of removing accommodationthe purchase programs are going to move to the slower pace, the liquidity programs are being gradually unwound, and other government support to the financial sector, such as the money market fund guarantees and the TLGP, are being withdrawn. At a time when the unemployment rate is very high and is still rising, and when there is ample slack in the economy, I think we want to be cautious in moving too quickly to take back 
additional accommodation. What we want is a robust recovery that pushes the unemployment rate down quicklythats what we are going for. That doesnt seem to be in the cards.  Nothing 
   that Ive heard around the table suggests that thats the expectation of the members of the Committee. Until we actually see that robust recovery, I think were getting well ahead of ourselves in talking about removing additional accommodation.  Although some are worried about the longer-term inflation outlook, over the next year or two, to me, the risks seem very much on the downside: Core services inflation has come down a lot; core goods inflation seems likely to follow, given the large amount of excess capacity available in the U.S. and abroad; were already below a rate of core inflation consistent with our longer-term forecast for the core PCE deflator; and core inflation typically falls during the early stages of recovery.  In fact, if the recovery were to turn out to be more robust than expected, I would expect that would lead to a further surprise on the productivity front and potentially even more downward pressure on inflation over the next year or two. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As many have remarked, there has been more good news over the intermeeting period, and I have been especially encouraged by the nascent recovery in private final demandthis is more than just an inventory cycle.  Importantly, better economic data are feeding and feeding off of continued improvement in financial markets, at least in many sectors of the those markets, so weve got a bit of a virtuous cycle in play, and thats a nice change from where we were a few months ago. The repeated pleasant surprises on the economy and upward revisions to the forecast led me to question whether I had been missing some part of the recovery process and should mark the forecast up further than the staff, even though the staff itself is now a little bit beyond private forecasters. I looked at a couple of candidates.  One was the issue of pent-up demand for houses, 
consumer durables, and business capital, given the very, very low levels of spending on these categories, and, in the case of houses, declines in prices, which ought to boost demand.  As the V-shaped recovery scenario in the Greenbook notes, investment is low, even relative to replacement demand, much less relative to some tendency for the capital stock to grow over time.  So pent-up demand is quite a possibility and would be characteristic of other recoveries, I think. Nonetheless, there are reasons to doubt a strong rebound in the current circumstances.  First, the recession started with a very marked oversupply of houses and, probably, of consumer durables given the overly generous supply of credit to households.  Its true that the housing vacancy rate has come down a little bitI think the last data we have are for the second quarterbut its still very high. For businesses, record low capacity utilization, high vacancy rates in many commercial structures, and, as most of you have noted in your comments, a very cautious outlook for sales, will hold back investment in that sector.  So I think stronger household and business investment spending is an upside risk, but its not part of my central tendency. The second candidate for a process I might be missing was more traction than anticipated for monetary stimulus now that the financial panic has abated.  That is, low levels of nominal and real interest rates along with massive amounts of reserves could be inducing a diversification into riskier assets, including foreign assets, which would lower the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and thereby raise bond and equity prices. This is exactly what we intended by our easy monetary policy, but it could be happening faster than we expected.  And I think elements in this story are certainly evident over the intermeeting period.  Like Presidents Plosser and Lacker, I was struck by the combination of higher equity prices and lower spreads with lower Treasury 
yields at the same time.  I think market participants gained confidence in the sustainability of the recovery, but they also gained confidence in the persistence of low inflation, given the incoming price data and the still-weak labor markets, which will keep demand from rising very rapidly.  Greater confidence in the outlook, reduced uncertainty in risk premiums, and low inflation risks enabled market participants to push off the expected date of policy tightening.  Notably, this 
phenomenon was widespread internationally and not particular to the United States.  So I see this as more of a current and expected interest rate channel responding to macroeconomic data rather than reflecting some putting to use of the large volume of reserves weve put into the system.  I expect continued improvement of this sort, in part reflecting markets that will continue to postpone expected tightening as inflation stays low, but I expect this improvement to be gradual. An important limiting factor in this is the banking system.  The gains have largely been in securities markets. Bank credit to households and small businesses remains very tight, and, if anything, tightened further over the third quarter, as we can see in the spreads on business loan rates over base rates in the Survey of Terms of Business Lending, and the problems perceived by small businesses in the NFIB survey.  Credit card spreads and terms have been tightening.  
Banks are looking at rising losses on consumer and CRE credit; those banks below the top few dont have the offset of higher profits from capital markets business.  The process of rebuilding bank capital and willingness to take risks is going to be gradual and prolonged, and, with securitization markets only partly recovered, our economy is likely to be more bank-dependent. President Plosser asked, What should we be looking at to gauge whether reserves are being put to use?  Id be looking at both the price, or interest rate, and quantity of bank lending as important things.  Weve already noted, I think, that prices stayed high, that is, the rates have stayed high. So, there is no evidence there. And the quantities also are very, very weakif 
  anything, the pace of the decline in bank credit has picked up.  I think if it were just a shift in demand, Id expect interest rates to come down while quantities were falling.  So I do think were looking at very, very tight, if not tightening, supplies.  To the extent that quantitative easing works through the money supply in the hands of the public, that, too, has been weak.  So I think greater traction for policy is an upside risk, but its also not in my central tendency.  My most likely outlook for activity is something like the staff forecaststrengthening growth as bank credit and lending capacity rebuild and as markets and households rebuild balance sheets, a very gradual rise in resource utilization, with the unemployment rate remaining high for some time. I think there are downside as well as upside risks to this forecast.  Weve all cited household saving as one possibilitythat is, households may decide to rebuild net worth faster in light of increased uncertainty about jobs, their financial position, and their reduced access to credit. Theres also a downside risk, as a couple of people have noted this morning, if it turns out that the improvement to the economy and financial markets has been more dependent on government support, both fiscal and financial, than we had been thinking.  As fiscal stimulus wears off over the next year and financial help and backstops are reduced by the Federal Reserve and other government agencies, I think theres a risknot a big one, but a riskthat growth could slow down or at least fail to gather momentum. So I think that something like the staff forecast, or even a little stronger, is likely to be accompanied by stable to falling inflation; core inflation continues to edge lowerby less than we expected some months ago, but its still edging lower.  Labor compensation is decelerating sharply to unusually low levels by many measures.  Some of this is adjustments in bonuses, and the bonuses are likely to rise again.  But I think that, looking through all of these measures, the 
underlying trend in compensation is clearly downward, and I take this as indicating that there is considerable excess supply in the labor market.  Combined with rapid productivity growth, unit labor costs are falling very, very fast. There are no labor cost pressures on businesses, and markups over unit labor costs have risen sharply. Id like to associate myself with the comments of Presidents Evans and Yellen yesterday on the question of slack and inflation. Measures of slack cannot be estimated with a great deal of confidence, nor can the relationship between slack and inflation.  But the unemployment rate has risen so high so fast, and capacity utilization has dropped so low so fast, that there must be considerable labor and capital resources looking to, and able to, be put back to work.  In this kind of environment, competitive pressures on employees and employers will remain intense.  I dont expect any sign of pricing power to emerge any time soon.  I agree that rising inflation expectations could overcome the effects of slack, but, to date, measures from surveys of households and economists from financial markets seem quite stable once you get beyond short-term energy- and liquidity-induced fluctuations. President Plosser raised the question of the level of the household survey.  Household surveys historically tend to run high, I think, higher than economists and higher than reality.  I know this has been a source of continuing frustration for the ECB, where they cant ever cite the household surveys as validating their inflation target, so they always cite the consensus forecasts of economists. In sum, I look for somewhat stronger growth, but a still-slow increase in resource utilization, and damped and probably declining inflation.  Well get to the policy implications in the next round. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 
  MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For the first time in a long while, I have more conviction about what is going to happen in the next two or three quarters than I do over the next two or three years. For the past couple of years, and especially last year, we wondered what was at our doorstep. Now we can look to the medium-term forecast and say, Well, this stuff will all work out. I would say in some ways this is as it should be.  Near-term prospects and projections should be clearer to policymakers, and I think for the first time, at least for me, they are. In terms of the trajectory of the economy, though, I would say I also feel better about the next few quarters than I do the next few years.  The reason for that improvement in conviction and in its strength on the real side of the economy has a lot to do with the asset price improvements and has considerably to do in addition, as Dave Stockton said yesterday, with inventories, as well as with the mix of fiscal and monetary measures, which are certainly helping the arithmetic of near-term GDP.  I think the Greenbook is right in suggestingand not being as dismissive as many of us, myself included, would have been six or nine months agothe chance of a positive feedback loop that takes us out of where we are with greater strength and conviction. Economies have been underestimated in the postwar era, and maybe were underestimating the resiliency of this one.  How durable is this improvement beyond the near term?  Weve all heard stories.  I heard many of them from you yesterday about Fortune 500 CEOs.  If I go back to the 20012002 recession and recovery, these CEOs were lousy indicators about the turns in the economy.  So I 
guess Im not that troubled that they continue to have their heads in their hands.  I think the difference this time, and the reason why this time they could be right, is that youve got to look long and hard to find real anecdotes of small businesses that are seeing opportunities.  Given 
  what Don talked about in terms of the bank lending, and the ability of small businesses to access credit, to access capital, and to get their own animal spirits back, it may be that businesses large and small are still suffering from a bit of pessimism, while we need them to be much more on their front foot. Another question about the durability of the improvement and whether it will find medium-term forecasts as good as the Greenbook suggests is the state of private final demand in 2010. Its hard to know whether the handoffs from the public sector stimulus to the private sector improvements will happen as smoothly and in as linear a fashion as the Greenbook suggests. Also, its hard to know whether recent improvements in industrial production are sustainable.   And on the consumer income issue that many people have talked about, the question is:  Will incomes be sufficient to fund consumption amid this specter of large unemployment?  Personally, Im more worried about low income, excluding transfer payments, than I am low consumption per se.  And, if the unemployment levels stay as high as they are, will there be enough impetus in incomes, particularly if our asset prices smooth out over time, to fund the kind of consumption levels that are consistent with a reasonably positive Greenbook-type forecast? My medium-term forecast, as a result of all of that, is improved somewhat, but its not marked up as much as the Greenbook.  I think the risks are predominantly, but not exclusively, to the downside. The risk is that potential economic growth and employment may have faltered, 
making this recession in some sense more costly than the recent loss of jobs and output alone.  I 
think the continuing questions of the fiscal sustainability and markets acceptance of continuing Treasury issuance are real risk factors to the medium-term forecasts. 
   Let me turn, then, to financial markets before talking about inflation.  On the financial market front, Id describe my own views, at least in terms of near-term financial market prices and market functioning, as tactically long but strategically short.  What do I mean by that? Theres still a ton of momentum in these markets.  As I said when we met last, about six weeks ago, though I was a skeptic about the degree of improvements in the spring and the summer, this thing has so much going for it in terms of momentum, in terms of money coming off the sidelines, in terms of institutional and retail investors who dont want to miss the next leg, that it strikes me as imprudent, at least in the very near term, to try to stand in front of this wave and not get blown over. Zero rates seem to be having some hand in driving this reflation in asset prices. But, why am I strategically short, or at least strategically nervous? I worry about the sustainability of these improvements in markets, given the questions weve all talked about on the real side of the economy.  Many are saying, Well, this time I will get out just in time, and that reminds us of what we heard not too long ago.  Still, on net, consumer net worth has rallied with asset prices, and it is probably up another couple trillion dollars when we see the ultimate data from the third quarter, with the corresponding wealth and confidence effects. What are market price signals telling us?  Market prices might be as unclear as theyve been in a very long time, even though on the real economy side we feel better.  Its tougher to judge what these markets are telling us because of a few changes:  one, seeming changes in investor preferences and asset allocation; two, changes in the financial architecture, which I have talked about before; and, three, our extraordinary participation as the government in these markets.  How much of the difficulty in handling these market signals is driven by our participation, explicitly and implicitly, is hard to tell.  I think the Chairman mentioned yesterday 
  this odd constellation of market signals since we last met as a Committeestock prices are up, bond yields are down, Treasury yields are down, the foreign exchange value of the dollar is down, commodity prices are up. That is hard for me to reconcile. I could tell a long and twisted story, but its not a terribly convincing one, and it would certainly be nothing more than a rationalization. But let me start on the simplest pieces of it, and those are stocks and bonds.  Why are they both performing as smartly?  I would say markets might be at a transitional pointsome kind of barbelland thinking about asset allocation.  Theyve seen equity markets move against them, theyre looking for alpha, theyre looking for returns, and so theyre going out and buying equities. But just in case theyre wrong, they want to make sure that they hold on to enough cashwhich is near and dear to their heartsso that if the world were to somehow end again, they would have that. Intermediate risks and intermediate credits seem to me to be looked upon somewhat more negatively by marginal investors. My last point on financial markets is on Treasury and Treasury market signals and what theyre telling us. They do seem to be incredibly supportive of massive issuance.  It reminds me in some ways of risk measures, where risk is highest when measures of risk are actually lowest.  The Treasury markets seem to be telling us that the supply will have infinite demand, but that should make us nervous.  It does strike me that the Treasury market wont get slowly but surely uncomfortable with these debt-to-GDP ratios, but rather that it might come in a hurry.  If it does, I think the consequences, both for the real economy and the challenges we face in monetary policy, will become quite remarkable. Now, when might that moment come?  I dont know.  But I would say that the debt-limit issue that the Congress and the Administration will be debating, most likely over the course of 
November, might well be that catalyst.  This debt-limit discussion has had a partisan nature to it going back about 20 to 25 years, but I wonder whether or not there is just enough in the air about fiscal sustainability that we should pay particular attention to what the Treasury markets are telling us in the forthcoming period. Finally, on inflation, I have to agree with the emerging consensus among many folks in this room about the pressure on wages, given various measures of slack.  Going against that theme, though, it does strike me that if the dollar continues to weaken against foreign currencies, and, for whatever reason, whether because of global final demand or something else, commodities continue to strengthen, these crosscurrents will be hitting each other.  How they net out for measures of inflation and inflation expectations strikes me as a paramount challenge for policymaking.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I start, Id like to go back to the question I missed yesterday, which was on the accounting.  I did find out that we actually take exception to GAAP with the evaluation of the SOMA portfolio on the rationale that our purchases and sales are driven by monetary policy considerations rather than valuation.  As we go forward with the MBS purchases, this rationale could get pretty stressed, especially if we choose the securities that we sell for their valuation rather than for some monetary policy reason.  I point that out just so that were aware that the accounting issues we face may ultimately have some political costs, at least when we start to exit, so we cant entirely ignore the losses in those securities. Turning to observations from the banking sector, most of the banks report little change in their current or expected condition since the last meeting.  In terms of new lending, theres very low demand across the board, but pricing is still significantly better.  I asked Why is it with very 
  low demand that your pricing is still so strong?  They said theyre only lending to the highest-quality credits with relationships, with profitability, and borrowers are actually happy to have the lending relationships intact.  Theres very little shopping and very little competition banks arent chasing someone elses customers and customers arent looking for a new bank.  Line usage is at historic lows, even by the borrowers who already have approved credit at very favorable pricing, and borrowers whose banks have closed or been acquired are actually orphaned and unable to get the best terms. Ive been trying to understand the difference between the credit availability in this cycle and the one that followed the last banking crisis. The staff used the flow of funds data to try to estimate the difference between forecast and actual levels of credit and found that at this point in the cycle about 46 percent of the difference can be explained by credit factors rather than economic factors, compared to 62 percent in the 199091 cycle. In terms of loan quality, interestingly, one member of the FAC noted that, when they met here a week or two ago, they had dinner with the Chairman and not one of the bankers had an outlook as positive as the Chairman expressed.  They were quite amazed at the Chairmans 
cheerfulness. [Laughter] Most see the next six quarters as stable, at best.  In terms of consumer credit charge-offs, they think theyre at or close to the worst, at least in dollar terms, if not in percentages, on credit card and auto loans. But they dont see any dramatic improvement from there, rather just a gradual pull back from current levels that are at historic highs. The same holds true for early-stage delinquencies on residential mortgages, which are now displaying their historic correlations with new claims rather than with overall unemployment, but the picture is a lot murkier for later-stage delinquencies.  Frankly, the systems were never designed to track modifications, foreclosure moratoriums, partial 
paymentsall of the things that are going on in the already delinquent loans.  So nobody seems quite sure, but most expect that the picture will be clearer by mid- to late 2010 and no sooner, as the bankers and servicers improve their processes for modifications and short sales, while foreclosure and real estate liquidation backlogs clear. Commercial real estate is still the big wild card, and at this point the losses on residential construction and land development loans are beginning at least to track the carrying values, and the book value of the remaining assets is very low.  There was, interestingly, some reported interest from the large national builders in finished lots in selected geographies, particularly 
Southern California and Texas and even a little bit in Las Vegas, and stated interest in land for development in 2011, but all at very low prices.  The weakest areas for construction loans are Florida, Arizona, and Nevada, with Florida reported as having the longest probable time for recovery. Income-producing properties are showing signs of stress, with rising vacancies and rent renegotiations, but most still view this stress as primarily driven by economic fundamentals rather than widespread overbuilding.  Hospitality is faring the worst, followed by retail and then industrial. Office properties are holding up remarkably well, as are multifamily residences. Losses on owner-occupied properties are tracking at fractions of the loss levels that were assumed in the stress test, and every single banker asserts that credit decisions for new and troubled credit are being driven over concern on regulatory classifications, regulatory classifications to capital, and examiner pressure.  Bankers are reluctant to take any action thats going to require them to raise additional capital, which is available to them in varying degrees, but uniformly expensive. In terms of forecasting, I have difficulty determining the degree to which the level of credit restraint thats baked into the Greenbook forecast matches the current banker mindset.  But 
  I have a hard time constructing a scenario where consumer spending returns with any vigor, given the weak appetite for risk and the high level of credit impairment. Bankers are talking about their desire to lend only to prime borrowers, but the population of subprime borrowers continues to grow.  Households with credit scores considered to be subprime has increased from 28 percent of the population at the peak in 2006 to nearly 36 percent.  In terms of absolute numbers, the number of subprime borrowers grew from 63 million to 80 million at the end of 2008, and this is before factoring in changes in income, wealth, or collateral values, which dont necessarily track where the population of subprime is found.  Banks report total unused commitments are down $1 trillion from the peak, with $1 trillion of that in credit card availability.  New credit card solicitations are down from a peak of 800,000 per month to 150,000 per month, with subprime down 85 percent.   The same credit impairment factors are also likely to influence the housing rebound.  Given the expectation that high losses in the construction portfolio are going to continue into next year, as will the intense regulatory scrutiny, banks willingness to lend for residential construction is especially low. Most of the sales in new construction are reportedly in low-end products, and banks forecast that they wont work through their backlog until mid-2010. Weve talked about improvement in financial markets, but nothing has been done to reconstruct the housing finance system or residential mortgage securitization outside of extraordinary government support.  As yet, there is not even the beginning of a consensus around the requirements for new private securitizations, while accounting changes seem to be creating new barriers. The first-time homebuyer credit is set to expire, and support for renewing it so far appears tepid. The Administration has announced that it will not have a proposal about the future of the GSEs until early next year, and it is apparently approaching this as a full discussion 
   of the proper role of government in housing finance.  The FHA is reportedly coming close to its minimum reserve level.  Its loan volume has spiked as private subprime retreated.  So it wouldnt be unreasonable to expect higher losses with that increase in volume.  Finally, our purchase of agency MBS is likely going to come to an end at least by the end of the first quarter. With all of these headwinds coming into play, I can envision a good case for actually extending our purchases and even expanding the size to get into the second quarter, as all of these supports are removed from the housing market.  At the same time, Im concerned that neither we nor the banks know yet how big an impact the addition of another $600 to $800 billion in reserves is likely to have. The big run-up in reserves actually occurred last fall when banks were scrambling for liquidity, and they really viewed it as their own decision to take on additional liquidity, not our decision to put the liquidity there.  Since then, the aggregate reserves have fluctuated in a fairly narrow band as new asset purchases were offset with reduced borrowing. So discussions with smaller banks paint a picture similar to what was found by staff in consultation with the larger institutionsthey havent focused on the reserves, but they report that they have more deposits than they can profitably invest and, therefore, are reducing their managed liabilities.  Rates paid on deposits are being reduced, and deposit competition appears benign. I would also point out that, at 25 basis points, reserves are the most attractive short-term risk-free asset for banks to hold. With the Treasurys planned SFP drawdown, settlements of prior purchases as well as new purchases, banks are going to see substantial and unexpected increases in their reserve balances very soon, and most bankers are not focused on the aggregate reserves in the system.  To bankers, this is just going to look like excess liquidity, and the only way to deal with excess liquidity is either to buy riskier assets or reduce liabilities.  Given the credit situation, I expect 
the bankers to shed liabilities, likely leading to shrinkage similar to that described by President Rosengren in the Japanese banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back in my accustomed spot at the end of the queue, I thought the one criterion for deciding what to say might be to offer only my insights that will add value to what has already been said.  Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement.  [Laughter] Understanding, however, that another purpose of the go-round might be to explain each members views to the Committee as a whole, let me note a few points that most inform my outlook. First, the employment situation continues to be dismal.  Scan the monthly BLS release, and the only demographic group whose unemployment rate looks less than disheartening is that for college graduates at 4.7 percent. A look behind even that figure gives little reason for 
comfort, insofar as it stood at 2.7 percent just a year ago.  Most of the rest of the numbers are downright discouraging. Of greater relevance, perhaps, for present purposes is the near 
unanimity of forecasters that improvement in the labor market will be painfully slow.  The most optimistic alternative Greenbook scenario has the unemployment rate barely breaking 7 percent at the end of 2011. A review of the latest Blue Chip economic indicators reveals that all but one of the 50 forecasters believe the average unemployment rate in 2010 will come in above 9 percent. To say that we are nowhere near achieving the maximum employment component of our dual mandate would be a major understatement.  The most that can fairly be said is that the 
bottoming of negative employment trends may at some point soon be coming into view. Second, in looking back at my statement at the last meeting, I would have to amend my view that GDP growth in the second half of 2009 will perhaps be quite positive to an expectation 
  that it will almost surely be quite positive with a good chance of being modestly above trend.  But I see little to change my view of six weeks ago that 2010 is most likely to witness what I termed the grind it out scenario, with economic growth ultimately above trend but nowhere near the slope of recovery one might expect out of a deep recession.   Indeed, there remains good reason to believe that one or more factors will keep the economic road sufficiently rocky that we will have difficulty sustaining a good head of steam.  Continuing high unemployment will impose a constraint on PCE growth.  A higher personal saving rate than the 4 percent, expected by the Greenbook to remain unchanged for the next two years, would similarly drag down PCE growth.  The fading of the stimulus package by the middle of 2010 creates further uncertainty as to just how robust consumer demand will be and, thus, how much production will grow once inventory drawdowns are completed.  The prospect of ongoing high levels of home foreclosures suggests that downward pressure on the housing market may not fully abate for some time.  Finally, the ongoing steep decline in bank lending, like the continuing dysfunction in some other parts of credit markets, appears to reflect something more than just the tightened lending standards associated with recessions. In the interest of completeness, I should note that prospects for a stronger global recovery have brightened considerably, one of the factors I suggested that might support my rejuvenation scenario here at home.  Asia, in particular, seems to have generated enough momentum to outlast the withdrawal of extraordinary stimulus. Still, I would note that in China and most other East Asian countries, we havent yet seen the emergence of a real promise of self-sustaining final consumer demand. If some of the preceding sounds familiar, it should.  I lifted a good bit of it from my comments at the August FOMC. The intervening month and a half has reinforced the positive 
   signs for the remainder of this year and, I would say, slightly rebalanced in a more optimistic direction the respective probabilities of relapse, grind it out, or rejuvenation.  But all three remain plausible outcomes.  In sum, I find myself singing much the same tune as last time, but even as I reprise my coda, I want to alter it a bit, adding some lyrics suggested by President Bullards remarks yesterday afternoon.  And here Im going to take advantage of my holding down the sixteenth spot in the batting order to slide a little bit into relevant policy considerations.  I stand by my August recommendation of patience during this period where the probabilities of each of my three scenarios remain significant.  The additional thought, picking up on President Bullards comment, is that we should be prepared to undertake an appropriate policy response no matter which of the three emerges as reality. As the rest of you will have quickly concluded, my own concern is specifically that we not regard the possible conclusion of the current large-scale asset-purchase programs as in itself raising the hurdle rate on future policy initiatives in the event that relapse seems to be occurring.  Its important in my view that we be clear on this point among ourselves and that we communicate it to markets and the public.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, and thanks to everyone for useful discussion. Im going to attempt here to summarize what Ive heard and then make a few additional comments. In summary, the outlook improved during the intervening period, particularly with respect to economic growth over the remainder of the year, and most participants believe that recovery had begun. Although anecdotal information suggests that businesses and households remain quite cautious, a number of factors should support growth over the next few quarters, including reduced inventory accumulation, higher auto sales and production, modest increases in 
 housing activity and prices, some stabilization in household spending, better financial conditions, and accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. The outlook for the medium term also seems better than at the last meeting, but there remains considerable uncertainty about whether final demand growth will be sustained once government policy supports, including special measures such as cash-for-clunkers and the first-time homebuyers credit, begin to wane.  The modal view was that the recovery in 2010 could be relatively slowmaybe a checkmark [laughter]perhaps around the long-run potential growth rate, a rate that would be too slow to reduce the unemployment rate significantly next year. Some suggested that downside risks to growth remained as well.  Inflation remains relatively low, but there was some disagreement about the factors that most influence inflation in the medium term and about the risks associated with our current mix of policies. Retail sales and consumer spending have picked up a bit, in part reflecting special factors, such as the cash-for-clunkers program.  Some consumer fundamentals are improved.  Notably, household wealth is rising again, and labor income may be stabilizing.  Sentiment, though still low, has improved, and there is possibly some pent-up demand.  However, especially weak labor markets, tight credit, and the slowing of the benefits of the stimulus package seem likely to restrain consumption growth.  Saving rates have been relatively stable, but the evolution of the saving rate remains an important uncertainty in the near term. In the housing sector, sales and starts have looked somewhat better, and house prices have actually risen a bit. Higher house prices not only increase household wealth, but they also improve the quality of mortgage-related assets and, by reducing the effective cost of capital, encourage home purchase.  However, foreclosures are likely to continue to put pressure on prices 
    by raising supply. Other risks to housing are the ending of the temporary tax credit for first-time homebuyers and the end of the Feds MBS purchase program. Activity in the nonresidential sector continues to decline sharply in most Districts, reflecting both worsening fundamentals and severe credit constraints.  In the business sector, managers are relieved that the worst scenarios have not come to pass, but, as already noted, many remain wary and uncertain about the recovery, and there is some disconnect between their perceptions and the relative strengths seen in the aggregate data. Business caution, together with low utilization rates and substantial excess capacity, suggest that many firms may be slow to add workers and make new capital investments.  Cost-cutting has contributed to productivity gains.  The sustainability of those gains is unclear but is potentially an important issue, for example, in determining whether the recovery will be jobless and how slack will evolve. Manufacturing surveys show some improvement, probably reflecting in part rising volumes of global trade and activity.  Indexes show a moderate increase in manufacturers expectations of prices paid and received.  Reports on retailing and services remain somewhat mixed.  Health care has done well, transportation less so.  Agriculture and natural gas production have been affected by lower prices. The labor market remains very weak, but may be close to the bottom.  Layoffs have slowed somewhat. Theyre still high, and UI claims are falling only gradually.  Gross hiring is weak. Wage growth is moderate, presumably reflecting the weakness of the market.  Unemployment is expected to decline only slowly, given the expectation that economic growth will not be significantly above potential next year, and given the recent experience of jobless 
recoveries. 
   Improvements in financial markets over the intermeeting period were not dramatic, but the substantial gains in the past six months were largely sustained.  Risk-taking and momentum have returned to the markets.  The decline in longer-term Treasury yields is somewhat puzzling, but at least for now it is supportive of recovery.  However, credit risks in the banking system remain substantial, particularly in residential and commercial mortgages.  Bank credit remains tight. Bank loans to smaller businesses, households, and commercial real estate, in particular, have fallen dramatically.  Securitization markets still are limited in their activity.  Banks terms continue to tighten, perhaps in part due to regulatory pressures. Inflation has been relatively stable, with a modest downward trend in the core, and the risks around inflation seem more balanced.  Wages and unit labor costs are decelerating, but, on the other hand, the dollar is weakening and commodity prices are up.  Participants differed on the fundamental determinants of inflation and consequently on their forecasts, and emphasis on inflation expectations as a driver of inflation, together with the Greenbook assumption that policy will stay easy much longer than markets expect, led some to worry about higher inflation in the medium term.  Alternatively, even if slack is an unreliable determinant of inflation in normal times, the very high level of slack that probably exists today could create disinflationary pressures. Very possibly, the stability of inflation expectations as measured in financial markets or in surveys may be disguising a great deal of uncertainty about how policy and inflation will ultimately evolve. Given the long lags of policy and uncertainties about the effects of unconventional policies, continued clarity about and attention to the Feds policies and exit strategy are important for retaining confidence. 
 Any comments? (No response.) Okay. With that let me just add a few thoughts.  I come after Governor Tarullo, so its even more difficult for me. I think were all glad that the general view seems to be that the near-term outlook will be better; the data since the last meeting support that view.  Of course, the question that everyone has alluded to is whether this near-term pickup will be sustainable going into 2010.  I think that this is actually a very complicated question, and there are good arguments on both sides.  So at 
the risk of being a little bit pedantic, Im going to do point and counterpoint and talk a bit about some of what I see as the main forces on the two sides. If you look at the case for sustainability, there are a lot of factors which suggest that final demand will be sustained next year.  I think the housing market developments are particularly important in this regard, and the staff has noted the improvements in house-price outlooks.  As President Yellen noted, this is not just a matter of wealthit potentially affects asset quality.  In addition, because expected price changes are part of the cost of capitalor, put another way, people dont want to buy houses when the prices are fallingsome sense that prices are stabilizing may be very helpful in terms of residential construction.  I think it is literally the case that since Ive been Chairman, there has not been a single quarter in which residential construction has added to the GDP. [Laughter] I wont go down as the housing Chairman, but the third quarter, apparently, may be different. The labor market is very weak, but overall, as job losses have moderated and as hours have improved slightly and wages have improved slightly, labor income is beginning to stabilize, which is an important precondition for multiplieraccelerator developments next year. Financial markets are, of course, very positive, and I would note that not only are they a cause of improved conditions in terms of credit availability and in terms of the positive financial 
 feedback loop, but they are also reflective of expectations.  In particular, developments in the stock market and the shape of the yield curve are suggestive that confidence about recovery is returning. On the consumer side, I mentioned last time that I felt comfortable with the Greenbooks assumption that saving rates will be stable going forward, in which case we should begin to see growth in consumption that will support a more sustained recovery.  And supporting that is the fact that wealth is beginning to turn around and that the drag from the losses of wealth over the last couple of years will begin to fade over time. The global recovery is another positive, although the effects are different and work through different channels. But, certainly, I think one of the reasons that manufacturing looks to be leading this recovery must be at least in part because of the exposure of manufacturing to trade. Finally, on the sustainability side, as Ted Truman and others have been reminding us, the norm for a deep recession is a fairly strong recovery, and there certainly are factors like pent-up demand and inventory adjustments that tend to bring economies back faster than sometimes is anticipated. On the other hand [laughter], there are some things that go against some of these basically optimistic forces.  A number of people have talked about the temporary nature of many of the government programs that are supporting economic growth nowthe housing market is a clear case of that.  People have mentioned the first-time homebuyers tax credit, which is now expiring. Presumably the Fed at some point will not be able to maintain the downward pressure on mortgage rates.  And there are other things going on as well, including developments in the GSEs, losses at the FHA that may force them to tighten their terms, and probably an increased 
pace of foreclosures as some of the moratoria and other delays end.  So the housing market is not out of the woods by any means, and the Greenbook does take into account a possible relapse in house prices. The labor market recovery looks much more like a jobless or very slow recovery than the alternative. For example, the UI claims, although falling, are doing so quite slowly, and we are all aware of the fact that the duration of unemployment is quite high, which is going to affect labor force attachment and skills and so on. The productivity issue really cuts both ways, as we discussed yesterday.  At least in the 2001 recovery, there was a close relationship between productivity at the micro level and phenomena associated with a jobless recovery.  I would point out that the Greenbook is not really forecasting a jobless recovery.  They anticipate, as I count here, 2.2 million payroll jobs in 2010 and 3.8 million in 2011 being added, which of course is possible, but it could be weaker than that if productivity and other forces are drags. The improvements in financial markets are very encouraging, but the banking system, I think, remains the most important exception, with credit being quite tight and potential losses being very, very important in that sector.  I was interested to hear Governor Dukes comments about the banks views vis--vis my own views.  In general they are being very, very cautious, in any case, about lending. Consumer spending has not yet demonstrated that it will be sustainable.  Cash-foclunkers and other measures, like the tax credits and transfers of the fiscal program, are, of course, temporary, and more broadly, the fiscal stimulus will begin to decline next year, as will the inventory correction. 
 And finally, although there is a presumption that a deep recession will be followed by a strong recovery, we have talked in this forum for a number of months about the many headwinds that we face, including leverage issues, credit issues, and various imbalances, for example, fiscal and trade imbalances, that need to be corrected. So Ive gone through all of these things not only to show you what an open-minded person I am [laughter], but also to say that I think our views need to be fairly nuanced at this point. I think the general outlook has improved, and I think theres a reasonable chance for the recovery to be sustained in 2010, but there are a lot of crosscurrents that we need to pay attention to. If I had to take a modal position, I would reiterate what I said at the last meeting, which is, again, I do anticipate the second half of this year to be pretty strong.  I said so last time, and I do think that the modal outlook for 2010 is for economic growth around potential, maybe a little bit above potential, with, of course, only modest effects on unemployment and job creation.  A number of factors support that, and the two most important factors since last time that influence my thinking are the improvements in the housing sector and house prices and the fact that global growth continues to be above expectations. So that would be my modal forecast.  I think we need to think about, if you will, the distribution of costs on both sides of that expectation.  And, putting aside the probabilities and risks, I think you can make the case at this point that, given how far we are from full employment, given the fact that banks are just going to skirt by in terms of their ability to maintain adequate capital given the expected losses, the social costs of an outcome thats weaker than we currently anticipate are on the margin greater than those if the outcome is a bit stronger than we currently anticipate.  And independent of any considerations of insurance and risk 
  aversion, I think that asymmetry in the shape of the cost function ought to make us still be focused primarily on supporting recovery, although we obviously need to pay close attention to the medium-term risks that others have pointed to. As we will discuss in the next round, I think that high levels of policy stimulus are still warranted, but, again, absolutely in the spirit of demonstrating my open-mindedness, I do, in fact, quite seriously want to talk a bit about the downsides of policy stimulus which many people have already noted. Clearly, while inflation is not a concern now, we do have to pay some attention to it, because, as President Hoenig points out, the lags can be long and variable.  I think someone mentioned that before you, President Hoenig. I will make one observation, though, on this.  Let me talk a bit about the determinants of inflation for just a moment.  First, on the output gap side, I think I would like to associate myself with some things that President Yellen and President Evans said, which is that a lot of the ambiguities in the statistical and empirical work on the output gap and inflation come from the fact that, over most of the data sample, the output gap is sufficiently small that it is dominated by noise. It is very hard to know whether there is a gap, how big it is, and indeed, there may be nonlinear effects of the gap on inflation. Let me propose a very simple analysis.  Just look at NBER peak datesbeginnings of recessionswhich are typically known within a year or 16 months or so of the actual peak.  Since 1960, looking at the second and third years after the peak date from the NBER, in all cases, total inflation has fallen in the second and third year relative to the year before the peak, and in most cases quite substantially, and in all but one, 1973, core inflation has also fallen, in most cases fairly substantially.  So there does seem to be a recession effect suggesting that large output gaps do affect inflation, even if the linkage is not visible for small gaps. 
 That being said, I think inflation expectations are important, and one way that shows up is that the effects of output gaps are obviously much smaller now than in the past.  We saw about a 2 percentage point decline in total and core inflation after the 1990 recession and only about a 1 percentage point decline after the 2001 recession.  Of course, this is a bigger recession than either of those two, and weve already seen about a 1 percentage point decline in core, but I think the direction there is correct. I think a few people talked about looking a bit at the components of inflation.  Were seeing a substantial slowdown in services prices, including rents, which tend to be pretty inertial.  So I think from that perspective we should see a slower rate of core inflation for a time, and from a cost perspective, unit labor costs are low as well.  At the same time, I recognize that, of course, commodity prices, the dollar, and so on can move pretty quickly and probably respond much more quickly to policy and policy expectations than these other factors do, and so we need to take a balanced view. I would also add that, on this issue of stimulus, there are other factors that I, at least, pay attention to in thinking about this over and above inflation per sefor example, the dollar.  The decline in the dollar weve been seeing has been relatively moderate.  It has basically only offset the gains that we saw late last year. Nevertheless, I think it would be very unfortunate if we had a more disorderly or more rapid decline in the dollar.  It would potentially have implications for domestic interest rates, it might lead to concerns about financial stability, and, more broadly, it may exacerbate some of the problems of international economic relations and our role in the international economic order that is a long-term consideration. Governor Warsh alluded to, I think, speculative activity in markets.  Frankly, I dont really see any major bubbles at this point, but we havent been that good at identifying them in 
  the past, and we need to pay attention, I think, to any kind of excesses in financial markets that might be generated by our activities. Finally, I think we do have to pay attention to our balance sheet.  These issues are less important, of course, than our macro objectives, but there are political implications from large losses or difficulties in managing the balance sheet, and we have to think about that certainly as part of our exit strategy. So, as a bottom line, like most of you, I see a strong second half as short-term factors play out. My modal forecast is for moderate growth next year.  Again, like most of you, I do think that the downside risks are significant, and we need to be particularly attentive to that, and I think that core inflation, at least, should be well controlled in the short to medium term.  Having said that, I fully understand and sympathize with the need for a balanced approach, which, even as we support this economy, keeps us alert to the problems of exit, which are clearly already beginning and will be an important part of our deliberations for some time. Any questions or comments? President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to make a comment about slack, since thats gotten a lot of commentary in past meetings from this end of the table.  I dont think anyone disputes the correlations you can find in the data or the correlations you get from the mainstream models we have.  I think the question is:  Whats the structural link?  To talk about correlations between inflation and measures of slack without talking about monetary policy is like talking about Hamlet without the Prince. I think the point some of us would make is that you cannot rely on slack by itself. The correlation you see is sort of an endogenous interaction. I know you all understand this, but Im just responding to the sense of puzzlement 
                                                     4 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). about what people who have talked about slack and potential output and inflation have in mind.  Im just speaking for myself here. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Its a good point, but I guess my quick reaction would be that if you look at these recession episodes I just described, the role of monetary policy in those has varied quite a bit. Some of them earlier on were essentially caused by tight monetary policy, others much less so.  So I think the commonality would be an aggregate demand effect.  But, 
again, Id be the first to agree that none of us has a really definitive, strong model of inflation, although for what its worth, I think the reviews of the Greenbook have shown better success in forecasting inflation and output. I think thats the academic result.  But, and I say this with all due respect to our colleagues who are doing the very best that anyone can do, neither one is incredibly successful beyond a few quarters. Anything else? (No response.) Okay. Brian, would you like to open the next round? 
MR. MADIGAN.4  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  Ill be referring to the package labeled Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.  This package includes alternatives A and C as they were presented in the Bluebook and the revised version of alternative B that was distributed on Monday. As was noted in the staff briefings and in your discussion so far, the economic outlook has improved further.  Data on business investment have been stronger than expected, and incoming information on home prices, home sales, and housing starts points to a recovery in this sector.  Also, financial market conditions have continued to become more supportive of growth.  Over the intermeeting period, interest rates have moved lower, stock prices have climbed, and the exchange value of the dollar has depreciated further, providing additional impetus to aggregate demand.  Moreover, indicators of market functioning have either held steady or improved further. The stronger outlook for economic activity has been reflected in substantial upward revisions to all of the staff estimates of short-run r*, including a  percentage point increase in the Greenbook-consistent measure derived from the FRB/US model.  Still, these r* measures remain negative, and despite the positive economic developments, the forecasted trajectory of economic activity and employment remains quite weak.  In the staff forecast, which is conditioned on an unchanged 
federal funds target range through the projection period, the unemployment rate 
   declines only to 9 percent by the end of next year and to about 8 percent by the end of 2011. The output gap remains correspondingly wide, with real GDP still 3 percent below its potential in the fourth quarter of 2011.  Although fairly stable inflation expectations are expected to restrain movements in inflation, the substantial output gap is still projected to push PCE inflation down to 1 percent in 2011, below the inflation objectives implied by FOMC participants longer-run projections.  Given this outlook, the counterfactual optimal control simulation in the Bluebook that does not impose the zero lower bound constraint would call for a reduction in the federal funds rate to minus 4 percent, if that were possible.  With the funds rate constrained at zero, the optimal control simulations suggest that the funds rate should remain at zero until 2012. Similarly, simulations of the FRB/US model using the outcome-based 
policy rule prescribe holding the funds rate at zero for nearly two full years before policy firming begins.  Of course, significant risksboth to the upside and the downsideattend the forecast, as your comments so far have underscored.  On the one hand, the Greenbook 
noted that the very low current levels of household and business investment suggest the risk of a greater-than-anticipated rebound in spending.  On the other hand, the Greenbook pointed to the possibility of a further increase in the personal saving rate as well as to the risk of greater financial headwinds.  Certainly, the incoming information from the banking sector, with exceedingly weak growth in bank credit and evidence that banks continue to tighten lending terms, suggests persistent restraint for the foreseeable future on spending by households and firms that are dependent on bank credit. Against this background, the Bluebook once again presented a set of alternatives that provided a wide range of choices for policymakers.  Under alternative A, the Committee would increase its large-scale asset purchases; under alternative B, the Committee would maintain the existing maximum sizes of its purchases; and under alternative C, the Committee would trim back its purchases. The alternatives also differ somewhat in the language of the statement. The Committee might be inclined to adopt alternative A, page 2 in the package, if it judged that, despite the improved outlook, the expected outcomes for output and 
employment were not satisfactory or that the downside risks to that outlook were 
unacceptably large. The Committees statement would again indicate that economic activity is leveling out and would note that conditions in financial markets have improved somewhat further.  However, the language in the first paragraph would cite factors that could restrain economic growth and indicate that, absent further policy action, the recovery could be relatively weak, with slack in resource utilization diminishing quite slowly.  To promote a sustained economic recovery and higher resource utilization, the Committee would increase its planned purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities by $250 billion to $1.5 trillion and extend these purchases through the second quarter of 2010. Staff estimates suggest that this action might lower longer-term interest rates by 15 to 30 basis points and reduce the unemployment rate two years ahead by as much as  percentage point below a 
     
 baseline outlook. The statement would continue to express the view that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. As shown by the red text toward the end of alternative A, this draft incorporates the suggestion that the more explicit phrase low levels of resource utilization and subdued inflation be substituted for the vaguer economic conditions in explaining the Committees expectation that the federal funds rate will remain very low for a protracted period. If the Committee instead judged that the current maximum amounts of its large-scale asset purchases reasonably balanced the various risks confronting the economy, it might be inclined toward alternative B, page 3.  Under this alternative, the Committee would also maintain its forward guidance regarding the funds rate.  With these policy choices largely expected by the market, an announcement of alternative B seems unlikely to have much effect on market prices. The first paragraph of alternative B would present a somewhat more upbeat picture of economic developments than that of alternative A. It would note, for example, that economic activity has picked up, albeit from a severe downturn, and 
would attribute part of that improvement to the housing sector.  However, as in 
August, the Committee would also say that household spending remains constrained by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. The statement would note that business investment and employment are still declining, but at a slower pace.  The statement would indicate that past policy actions and market forces will support a strengthening, rather than a resumption, of economic growth, thus suggesting that the Committee now sees a recovery as having begun, and would note that these factors would contribute to higher levels of resource utilization. Paragraph 2 of alternative B would state that substantial resource slack and stable inflation expectations should help keep inflation subdued for some time.  We 
suggested the revised language shown in blue in place of language included in the Bluebook, because, upon further reflection, it seemed best not to implicitly suggest uncertainty about whether or not inflation expectations are well anchored by using the word apparently, which was included in the Bluebook draft. Under alternative B, the Committee would maintain the existing maximum amounts for its large-scale asset purchases, but it would shift back the completion date for these transactions either to the end of the first quarter or to sometime in the second quarter. If the Committee wanted maximum optionality regarding its purchases, it might retain the current up to language shown in blue brackets and extend the period of purchases into the second quarter.  The longer time period for these purchases, along with the up to language, would provide the Committee more 
time to decide to scale back or end these purchases before the full $1.25 trillion were purchased. The Committee might find this flexibility valuable if it saw a significant 
chance that economic conditions ultimately would not warrant buying the full 
amounts.  Alternatively, members might see this flexibility as useful if they saw 
         significant risks regarding the Committees capacity to eventually execute an exit strategy with very high reserve balances.  Arguably, extending the completion date into the second quarter would also allow the Committee more flexibility to increase purchases in the second quarter in order to provide more stimulus in the event that the economic recovery flags; that is, it might be easier to ramp up purchases in the second 
quarter from a low level rather than from a program that had come to an end. The cost of this flexibility would be less certainty in the markets about the ultimate size and duration of Committees asset purchases and so somewhat higher mortgage and other long-term interest rates than if you committed to the maximum purchase size. If instead you fully expect to purchase the current maximum amounts and want to give market participants confidence that your MBS purchases will not fall short of their expectations in order to maximize the effectiveness of your purchases, you could drop the two words in brackets.  As a memo from Brian Sack and his colleagues indicated, the Desk recommends tapering through the end of the 
first quarter, given the current maximum amount of MBS purchases of $1.25 trillion.  I should note that, in the sentence on tapering and timing, we recommended changing its purchases to these purchases to make clear that the specified completion date of either the first quarter or the second quarter applies only to the current purchase programs, not to some possible future program. A relatively small issue:  The first sentence of paragraph 3 recognizes that various Federal Reserve liquidity programs have been closed or are being wound down by no longer referring to all available tools.  The Committee may wish to consider 
whether the adjective wide should be used to describe the range of tools being used to promote economic recovery and preserve price stability.  There is some chance that a change to just a range of tools might be read by observers as signaling that the Federal Reserve was pulling back more sharply from its support programs than the 
revision in language was intended to suggest. But the Committee might see the recent stronger-than-expected economic data as indicating that buying less than the full $1.25 trillion of MBS is desirable and thus see alternative C, page 4, as appropriate. Alternatively, members might be inclined toward alternative C if they were particularly concerned about the possible 
implications of very high reserve balances for inflation expectations or for actual monetary stimulus. In that vein, a decision to purchase less than the previously specified maximum amounts might also be motivated by concern that the Treasury 
will not rapidly rebuild balances in the SFP even after the debt ceiling is lifted, thus 
injecting more reserves into the banking system than the Committee had anticipated. In comparison with alternative B, the first paragraph of alternative C would give less emphasis to remaining economic weaknesses and downside risks.  The statement 
would also put less stress on resource utilization and suggest less of a role for slack in restraining inflation.  Under this alternative, the Committee would indicate its intention to purchase about $1 trillion of mortgage-backed securities and about $150 billion of agency debt, less than the current $1.25 trillion and $200 billion 
   maximum amounts.  These purchases would be tapered and completed by the end of this year. The Committee would also revise its forward rate guidance to indicate that the funds rate would be kept at its current exceptionally low level only so long as inflation remains well contained and only until the Committee has greater assurance that the economic recovery will be sustained.  With investors apparently coming to the conclusion recently that exceptional policy accommodation will indeed be 
maintained for a protracted period, market participants would be quite surprised by a statement along the lines of alternative C, and, as discussed yesterday, interest rates would likely jump noticeably.For your reference, the table on the next page summarizes the alternatives, and draft directives are provided on the final pages.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions for Brian? (No response.) I understand coffee is ready. We could have coffee now so that we dont break up the go-round. So well take 20 minutes for coffee.  Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why dont we recommence and begin the policy go-round with President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My preferred statement for this meeting is a slight variant of alternative C for basically most of the reasons that Brian Madigan alluded to.  I think that the Committee is not yet ready to begin exiting from the extended period language of the statement.  I happen to think it is time to do that, and Im hoping that the Committee will get to that point relatively soon.  So, given my understanding of the Committees preferences, Id like to address instead the language in alternative B.  I think its important to try to explain to the Committee my concerns and why. I think that this debate about slack is at the core of thinking about policy, and that means the Phillips curve is at the core of how we think about monetary policy.  In my view, it is true that the data and most of the empirical research suggest that the relationship between inflation and the output gap, at least the simple bivariate relationship, is not terribly stableit tends to 
   vary over time.  And it tends to vary over time in part because, as President Lacker said, the Phillips curve is usually estimated as a reduced-form statistical relationship.  It is not necessarily a structural one. One of the things that I think we know about the Phillips curve relationship, as it is usually thought of, is that a necessary, although not sufficient, condition for this relationship is stable expectations of inflation.  In order for us to have any predictable relationship between the output gap and inflation, we need stable inflation expectations.  And one of the things that is important for the stability of inflation expectations is that the public forms expectations about inflation, and the actions and language of monetary policymakers can shape those expectations. Therefore, my concerns are about the language we use to explain our current policy actions and how it may shape expectations going forward.  And I think we have to be careful about that language, so that it reflects the importance of expectations, and so that it reflects the fact that expectations dont move independently of either our words or our actions.  We know that expectations matter from past episodes.  Marvin Goodfriend identifies inflations scares in 1983 and 1987. They tended to occur when the Fed has tried to exploit the Phillips curve by delaying in raising rates (or in cutting rates after the economy has weakened).  The response to both of these inflation scares was that inflation expectations were cut off by the Feds reacting and raising rates to fight the inflation scare, thereby preserving its credibility to maintain price stability. I think one of the questions that the Committee has to ask itself and be prepared to act on is: How would it react if there were an episode where inflation expectations do begin to rise, or inflation begins to rise because of fears of the size of the Feds balance sheet, because of fears of monetizing the debt, or whatever? And if that happens when slack is high and large, as it is now, how will the Committee respond? 
I think that putting expectations of inflation in paragraph 2 of the statement was a very important step forward, although from a language standpoint I think it should be stronger than it is. I think the statement ought to read, With longer-term inflation expectations stable, substantial resource slack is likely to dampen cost pressures and keep inflation low.  I want it to be a conditioning statement, not a passive statement, as if expectations were kind of an afterthought.  If we can reverse those clauses, it would be a more accurate statement about, I think, what we actually know about the Phillips curve. I also think that the language in the statement has to be consistent with giving us the option to raise rates at some time in the future, when slack, however you choose to measure it whether it be unemployment or outputis high.  What I fear about this language, and our persistent use of resource slack in the statement, is that were creating the impression that we will not act in response to inflationary concerns.  I think we need to be more balanced and nuanced about the nature of the language we are using to ensure that we will act, if required, to preserve both aspects of our dual mandate.  I also worry that, without both the conditioning aspects of inflationary expectations and more about preserving price stability, were potentially creating a problem where the public will come to perceive that we will not act until resource utilization is high or higher at some point. The measures of resource utilization, I think, are problematic.  I think we have a very difficult time measuring resource utilization, and I think we have a difficult time measuring inflation expectations. But I dont think that absolves us of the responsibility of having to deal with both of them.  Choices among measures of resources utilization depend a lot not only on statistics and on measurement problems, but also on what kind of model one has and different models yield different measures.  At the Philadelphia Fed, we have a DSGE model, sort of a 
     workhorse neo-Keynesian macro model.  There, our resource slack measures are about minus 3 percent, as opposed to minus 6 or 7 percent as in the Greenbook.  Well, what does that say? They both contain measurement error, clearly, yet where do you start? The question is not what we do today, but what we do down the road when we reach the point where we are going to have to make a decision.  And Im terribly worried that we might get ourselves into a position where we cannot make that decision.  As the resource gap narrows, obviously, well get closer and closer to facing a very difficult choice. So I think this is really about language.  Its about shaping the state-contingent nature of our policy actions, and those policy actions depend not just on resource slack, but also on the path of inflation and inflation expectations.  I think we need to make that clearer, and I think the language in alternative B is unnecessarily distorted towards saying that we dont care about inflationthat policy is going to be flat for as far as the eye can see.  And I think thats potentially misleading.  It is also problematic, because it sends a signal about how policy will react. I think we have to be very worried about that, and Im very sensitive about that, which is why my focus and my comments yesterday were a lot about expectationsnot that theyre easy to measure, but that they matter a lot in this context.  And I think we have to preserve our flexibility. Id like to make three points about the language in alternative B.  First, in paragraph 1, we added new language about a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization.  Im not exactly sure where that language came from.  Its new language.  I dont know why we want to bring it back in. Id prefer just to see us say, Strengthening of economic growth, and eliminate the phrase and gradual return to higher resource utilization and in the context of price stability. I have real problems with in the context of price stability. I dont know what that 
 means.  It seems to convey that somehow were not responsible for that context or that we dont have to be accountable for itits sort of an environmental factor that we react to.  I think higher inflation and higher inflation expectations should not be treated as an environmental factor.  They should be something we take responsibility for.  Second, in paragraph 2, I have already suggested that I would prefer to see with longer-term expectations stable as the opening clause, as a conditioning clause, that says that is what permits slack to keep inflation contained.  And, third, as to the up to phrases, I think it is terribly important that we keep up to.  Even if were not ready to cut, I think, given the nature of the recovery, if we stretch this out too far, we may find ourselves in this conundrum of buying MBS and maybe trying to raise rates at the same time, in which case undoubtedly we would stop buying MBS.  So I think we need that up to language. I think this debate is really about forming the language and the expectations of the path of monetary policy, not about what inflation is doing today, or maybe even what it is going to be doing next quarter or the quarter after that.  I have no fears of inflation in the near term, but its about shaping the longer term, about keeping our options open, so that we have the ability to act and do act when the time comes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. The Greenbook forecasts disinflation and high unemployment rates over the next two years. I agree with this forecast. These outcomes occur with an assumption that the federal funds rate will remain at exceptionally low levels for an extended period of time, so I am very comfortable continuing to say that in the statement. 
In terms of the LSAP program, we should purchase the entire $1 trillion in mortgage-backed securities. We should also taper the program, though I would prefer to leave the completion date flexible depending on market conditions.  I have a strong preference not to end the program prematurely. I agree with Presidents Evans and YeltsinYellen[Laughter] MR. FISHER. Ive gone drinking with Janet.  Shes no Yeltsin.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. The last two minutes will be struck.  [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN. Continuing with my statement, that persistently high unemployment is likely to result in low and falling inflation.  This suggests that we will need to maintain an accommodative stance for some time to come.  We have only tentative signs of a recovery at this point, and we should not take actions that risk reversing these initial positive signs. I, too, have a couple of comments on the language.  I would remove up to for two reasons. Not completing the $1 trillion purchase will signal that we are content with the path where inflation is below my target and the unemployment rate is above my target through the forecast horizon.  I do not want to send such a signal.  Second, housing is improving.  However, the first-time homebuyer tax incentive is ending at the end of November, and I would not want our support for housing to end at the same time.  I would also change the sentence on tapering to remove the last clause and instead say, The Committee will gradually slow the pace of its purchases in order to promote a smooth transition in markets.  This would provide flexibility in tapering and highlight our goal of ensuring a smooth transition.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
 MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now that the economy has stabilized and looks as if its beginning to recover, albeit perhaps tentatively, I think its time to start calibrating our policy stance a little more carefully. You argued, I think quite convincingly, for the array of factors affecting the outlook, and obviously the implication is the great uncertainty about just how that balance of forces is going to play out.  And you argued compellingly, I think, as well for nuance in our views. And I think that needs to be reflected in our policy stance as well. The maximum amounts for our purchase programs were set back in March, amidst the bleakest days of the recession. We made very rough estimates of what was needed, based on the best analysis we could muster coming into that meeting.  But, if you read the transcript, we changed those numbers on the fly.  Things looked potentially very grim, and we picked large numbers and raised them during the meeting, and I think it was out of a sense that we wanted to convey credibility to our commitment to do what it took.  But to some extent, looking back on that, and looking back at the deliberative process, the numbers were somewhat arbitrary at the time.  We deliberately set maximums rather than predetermined amounts, so that we could take advantage of incoming information and adjust our plans accordingly.  We explicitly have acknowledged in our statements that we would monitor programs and make adjustments as warranted. Weve talked a lot at this meeting and previous meetings about the extent to which, until now, our asset purchases have just amounted to our displacing short-term borrowing, and about the fact that our short-term borrowing has had us basically accommodating an elevated demand for reserves, and about the fact that we havent perhaps done much by quantitative easing until maybe the last couple of months; perhaps we did so as well in the February to May time frame I dont know. But as I said yesterday, I think were at the point where, from here on out, every 
  additional purchase represents additional monetary stimulus in the quantitative easing sense, as if we were continuing to cut rates. I would point out again, over $300 billion is going to be added to reserve balances from MBS settlements and the runoff in the SFP, and new MBS purchases would provide additional reserves on top of that. If we continue with our asset purchases, my sense is that thats going to give us further declines in rates, albeit from very low levels, and albeit of an uncertain amount, and Ill acknowledge that it could be small, as Bill Englishs analysis yesterday showed.  But my sense is that were going to get more stimulus than the Greenbook assumes.  Again, how much more is quite hard to know, obviously. A couple of other factors are relevant here, at least to my thinking.  First of all, its not clear what net stimulus the MBS purchases are providing, over and above their effect on reserves. If you look at the OIS spread, which has been, relative to its historic fluctuations, essentially near zero for a lot of this year, it suggests we have gotten to the point where maybe MBS, which are issued by an entity that is, after all, in government receivership, is a perfect substitute for Treasuries. And you would expect at that point that buying MBS is just like buying Treasuries. We talked earlier this year about the effect of different purchase program strategies, whether to buy Treasuries or MBS. The staff did the best job it could, with limited data and limited natural experiments to go on, to give us a sense of what yields would do.  But they didnt give us any evidence that would refute the hypothesis that you would come to naturally, from just looking at a standard model, namely, that if were successful in driving down MBS rates, 
then that would come at the expense of raising rates elsewhere in the economy.  It has never been clear to me that lowering mortgage rates is, on net, stimulative to the economy.  And Ill admit 
     we dont have much evidence one way or the other, but its hard for me to rule out the notion that were just shifting credit from one sector of the economy to the other. Im happy to stipulate, as Vice Chairman Dudley requests, that we are not worried about an exit strategy. Im sure we can find an exit.  The question is which exit we want to take. Im fine with the idea that we can find an exit strategy that raises rates, but I think theres an 
important question as to what we are going to exit to, what regime were going to be in afterwards. And I think the open question has to do with how big our balance sheet is and whats in it when we finally exit.  Im sure theres going to be resistance to selling MBS down the roadI can just sense it. Our plans are to hold on to it, let it roll off. There would be political headwinds on that. So Im reluctant to have us essentially be the housing lender of last resort.  
And it strikes me as odd that we would head towards a configuration of our balance sheet in which were issuing nonmonetary liabilities to fund housing debtthe political economy of that for a central bank just strikes me as odd.  And I think we ought to strive to avoid it. So all of these factors make me wary of increasing our MBS portfolio any more than we need to. Im not ready to say now that we ought to scale back and cancel all the rest of the purchases, but I think we need to leave our options open.  Between now and the next meeting, I think well learn a lot about this quantitative easing question, if the projections are correct.  So I would argue strongly for retaining the up to language. On other questions, I like the idea of tapering.  I like President Rosengrens suggestion of language that is less committal about the timing.  In particular, if we do include the phrase second quarter, the preposition in implies that were going to get all the way there, so it might be better to say by the second quarter or by the end of the second quarter.  That way 
   were not committing to purchase enough to get us to the second quarter.  And Im happy with dropping the word wide. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I just wasnt quite clear on your last point.  What was your preferred language for the end of that sentence? MR. LACKER. Well, if were going to do second quarter, it should be by the second quarter or by the end of the second quarter, rather than in the second quarter, which implies we get all the way there. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see. Okay. Thank you. President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B today, but I do so reluctantly. I think our asset purchases, especially our MBS purchases, have been successful in lowering longer-term borrowing costs and supporting the housing sector and the broader economy.  In addition, I believe our toolkit to remove accommodation when the time comes is ample.  That said, I agree that further expansion of our MBS program entails some risks and possible costs along with the benefits. Given the improvement in the economic outlook and in financial conditions since our last meeting, Im not prepared to argue for an expansion of the program today.  But I strongly agree 
with Vice Chairman Dudley and President Rosengren that we need to complete the full 
$1 trillion in MBS purchases that markets now anticipate, and Id like to do so in a manner that is least disruptive to the mortgage market.  I, therefore, favor striking the words up to in alternative B. Curtailing our purchases at this late stage in the program would likely push up mortgage rates, and I believe it would be taken as a signal of an earlier exit from near-zero interest rates than markets now consider likely. 
      In addition to removing the words up to, I would like to soften some of the language concerning the timing and completion of the program.  And, following President Rosengrens suggestion, I think we dont need to announce a definite end date for the program at all, and I would support his suggestion. This would give added flexibility, I think, to the Desk in gearing the timing of the phasedown to evolving marketing conditions.  If we do end up giving a time frameQ1 or Q2I would like to propose that we substitute the word executed for 
completed in paragraph 3 of alternative B, in other words, to say that we anticipate that they will be executed by, say, the end of the first quarter, or however thats decided.  I think that substitution subtly distinguishes our characterization of the Treasury program, where we use the term completed, from our MBS purchases.  I believe that leaves the door slightly more open to ramping up the pace of our purchases again, if the recovery does end up suffering a significant 
setback and we faceGovernor Tarullo, what was the name you gave the scenario? MR. TARULLO. Relapse. MS. YELLEN. a relapse scenario. In that event, the balance of costs and benefits of further MBS purchases could reverse. So I do not want further expansion of MBS purchases or other initiatives to be entirely off the table.   Although I can agree to leave the size of our MBS program at $1 trillion today, I see a strong case on policy grounds for further monetary stimulus.  Core inflation is currently below my price stability goal of about 2 percent, and the unemployment rate is well above my full employment goal of about 5 percent.  I anticipate a tepid recovery, but even if the recovery is somewhat more robust, this situation will persist for many years. I am pretty sure that, if it were possible, we would at this point have taken the federal funds rate into negative territory. That would be consistent with our historical behavior, with 
 optimal policy calculations, such as those reported in the Bluebook, and with the guidance of most policy rules. Unfortunately, so far this year, the nominal funds rate has been fixed near zero while core inflation has fallen. So the real funds rate has risen.  In this sense, monetary policy has actually tightened this year, although circumstancesnamely, the increase in unemployment and decline in core inflationseem to call for more monetary stimulus.  Even taking account of our large-scale asset purchases, I think the effective degree of easing, given the dislocation in financial markets, likely has been modest relative to past recessions. I agree with President Plosser that communications are a logical device to use, and I think the most obvious way to provide additional stimulus without further balance sheet expansion is to use language designed to bring market expectations of the funds rate path into closer alignment with the Greenbook path, thereby lowering medium-term rates.  Market expectations concerning the likely path of the funds rate have come down over the intermeeting period, but there is still a gap between market expectations and the Greenbook path, which coincides with my own preferred path. To help narrow that gap, I propose replacing the language in paragraph 3 of alternative B with the language in paragraph 3 of alternative A. Specifically, I would replace the vague phase Economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period with the alternative phrasing stating that The Committee anticipates that low resource utilization and subdued inflation are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels.  This language would indicate to markets that the FOMC will not raise rates merely on the basis of strong economic growth if, in fact, we are nowhere near maximum sustainable levels of employment and activity and if inflation is subdued.  It would 
provide a conditional statement that would usefully inform the expectations of financial market participants.  I know that this phrasing will not appeal to those members of the Committee who 
   reject the notion that slack influences inflation.  But it is consistent with the language of B that already embraces the logic of such a linkage. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, and Ill discuss some of the different language choices in a second.  There are three premises to my policy 
recommendations.  The first is that the most likely outcome for the economy, even with rates very accommodative for an extended period, is still unsatisfactory.  Its less unsatisfactory than it was at the last meeting, the meeting before that, and the meeting before that, but its still unsatisfactory. One of our legislative objectives is high employment, which I take to be somewhere in the neighborhood of the NAIRU.  Even if the NAIRU is higher than 5 or 5 percent, we are going to be, in my view, above that for a long, long time.  Furthermore, inflation is more likely to be below the 2 percent that most members of this Committee favor for an objective than above it. So I think were going to be away from our legislative objectives for a while. I agree with President Hoenig and President Plosser that were going to have to raise rates before we get to full employment.  Weve always done that, and were going to have to do it again, as well as anticipate getting there.  But I just think that the size of the output gapeven given a range of estimatesand the likelihood that the economic recovery is going to be gradual suggest that it will be at least an extended periodwhatever that isbefore we have to do that.  So one implication is that I dont think we need to tighten in any way, shape, or form in response to the better outlook. The better outlook just gets us to a less bad place. The second premise is that were in a liquidity trap.  Reserves and other short-term obligations, particularly riskless obligations, are pretty much perfect substitutes.  Banks will hold more reserves now without much, if any, effect on other interest rates.  So I dont view additional 
reserve provision as an easing of policy, and its certainly not comparable with reducing interest rates. Now, these reserves could be stimulative in the futureI agree with thatif risk-adjusted returns on bank loans and securities begin to look favorable relative to the rate were paying on deposits. But they dont look favorable nowwe got that from the survey Bill English reported on. I think that when they begin to look favorablewhen we begin to see the movement we were looking at beforeI think we can begin to exit. That leads me to my third premise, which is that we do have the tools, or the staff is in the process of making us the tools, to neutralize or absorb reserves and raise rates when we need to do so. The efficacy of those tools is not materially affected by $200 billion or $300 billion more of reservestheyll work just as well.  Now, I agree, Mr. Chairman, this is something we 
need to continue to worry about and to work on.  But I am confident that we will be successful in designing the exit tools.  Using them is something else, but we will have the tools when we need them. That leads me to some comments on alternative B.  I think paragraph 1 strikes about the right balance. Things are looking better, but its not clear how much better.  The labor market 
remains very weak.  Weve had all of one month of an increase in sales in the retail control group, so to say that consumption is really on a strong upward track I think is a very, very tenuous conclusion. So I think that paragraph is about right. With respect to the last sentence that President Plosser discussed, I view this sentence as a forecast rather than an objectivewere forecasting that this is going to happen.  However, when we reference what we will do, its in the first sentence of paragraph 3.  Specifically, when we reference our tools, we say, We will employ our tools to preserve price stability. Thats a key message, and I agree with you, President Plosser, that its critical to keep that message in 
 there. But I dont see it being contradicted by the last sentence of paragraph 1.  I like the addition of the gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization.  Now that the economy has turned around and is improving, our actions arent keyed just to whether the economy is growing or not, but also to how fast its growing, so I thought this was a good addition. In paragraph 3, Id like to focus on a couple of things.  I think the shift from all available tools to a range or a wide range of tools is a nontrivial shift in tone and will be noticed.  I think its fair to say that our intention is not to use all available tools, if the economy follows something like the baseline forecast, because there are costs to using these tools relative to the benefits. But I think, as Governor Tarullo said, if the economy is less robust, if inflation continues to decline, if inflation expectations start following inflation downand I think there is a significant risk of thatthe Committee should consider using longer-term LSAPs, and lowering the rate on excess reserves.  And, certainly, under those circumstances, Ill be arguing for those actions. With inflation coming down, the adverse effectsthat is, the costs in terms of potential inflation expectationswill be much less than they might have been before.  I do not interpret the change in language here as ruling out the possibility of using those tools if circumstances change and dont turn out the way we want them to be, and I wanted to make that clear to the rest of the Committee.  I think its important to retain the extended period.  I dont know whether that means 2011 or the second half of 2010, but even if its the second half of 2010, thats quite a ways from now, and its way too early to signal anything. I would taper the agencies down, and I dont feel that we have to go to the full $200 billionif we fall short of it, thats fine.  So I would certainly keep the up to for the agencies. With respect to the MBS, I would taper that also, but in the context of announcing that well complete the program.  I think completing it is what the market expectsits built into 
 rates. Not doing so would raise interest rates.  I dont know by how muchit could be 5 basis points, it could be 35 basis pointsbut Im pretty sure the direction it would go in, and, given my outlook for the economy, thats not the right thing to do.  To me, that would be a tightening of policy relative to market expectations.  And I do think markets also expect that the additional purchases will result in more reserves, and if theyre thinking in quantitative easing terms, theyve probably also built that into market prices.  So I think not completing it would be contrary to expectations and would be a tightening of policy; and, as Vice Chairman Dudley noted yesterday, I think the effect to be concerned abouteven more than the rise of a few basis pointswould be the signaling that were getting ready to exit a lot of things very quickly.  So, although I dont think keeping up to in there would be a major problem, I do think it would leave uncertainty. I think now is the logical time to announce the full programs consistent with what we did with the Treasury. Why leave markets uncertain? So I would delete up to in front 
of the agency mortgage-backed securities phrase.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I see it, current FOMC policy has three parts. One part is our liquidity programs, one part is an asset purchase program, and the third part is a near-zero interest rate policy. The liquidity programs are running off, and, in my view, that seems to be going smoothly.  I would see that as the panic receding and as our having performe
resort function by developing liquidity programs to address the crisis. On the near-zero rate policy, if you look at the previous two recessions, it was about two and a half to three years before a rate move following the end of a recession.  So it could be that 
this FOMC is different from previous incarnations, and I do think that the too low for too long 
   argument will weigh heavy on us in the coming quarters.  But just taking the staff forecast at face value, and taking the experience in the previous two recessions, we are looking at a rate move in the first half of 2012, if you believe that back of the envelope estimate.  During the interim, more shocks are going to hit the economy.  In my mind, the question is how to run an active monetary policy to be able to react to these shocks while your interest rate policy is going to remain on hold for some period. It seems to me, like any reaction, it would have to come through asset purchases. So the question is how to do this. The policy were contemplating, to me, looks like this.  Were contemplating ending the asset-purchase program in the first half of 2010, and were contemplating letting the natural runoff draw down the purchased MBS over a period of several years, as long as six years.  A round number for that runoff is $200 billion a year, so lets just tuck that away and keep that in mind.  Were going to use other tools to control the flow of excess reserves into the money supply, if we should get into a situation where the excess reserves start to move in that direction.  In my view, theres nothing optimal about relying on this natural runoff.  This is just an unconditional decline, regardless of how news arrives about economic performance.  So in my view, the question would be: Can we do something that leaves the Committee in a better position to control this situation? Heres my suggestion.  I think we could taper, as suggested by the staff, but not to a full exit from the MBS purchase program, or, more generally, asset purchase program, as suggested by President Rosengren, President Yellen, and many others in the discussion just now.  In my 
view, if we quit the program altogether, it will be harder to make adjustments.  Of course, you could always come back and say, Im going to restart the program, but its going to be very difficult, and it would take a big event to get that going.  So one idea would beand I talked 
  about this last timeto taper to a very low number; a number that makes sense to me, just to fix ideas in our head, would be something like $4 billion per week.  That would add up to roughly $200 billion a year, and I would leave it to the Desk as to the best way to transition to that. You could think of that, maybe, as a neutral policy, thenyoud be replacing the natural runoff. And youd still have a program that was intact.  Then, you could take action from there depending on how conditions evolve and how the recovery evolves going forward.  So this is one way to go to a much lower growth rate of MBS purchases.  By keeping the program open, we can react as news arrives on the economy.  If the recovery is unexpectedly soft or we face renewed problems, we could increase the pace of purchases, though probably not up to numbers like $50 billion a week. If the recovery is unexpectedly robust, we could consider selling some amount per week, probably without too much market disruption.  Of course, we would do all of this in conjunction with other tools, such as interest on reserves and reverse repos. One idea about going in this direction is that it might help us avoid an early pullback from our quantitative easing program, like the one that doomed the Japanese quantitative easing program in the early part of this decade.  I dont think we want to get into that boat.  Im describing an alternative strategy for where to place the asset purchase program in 2010.  The discussion today is mostly about tapering and the size of the MBS program.  My proposal is to think less about the size of the program in an absolute sense and more about how we might want to adjust the program going forward based on incoming information.  I would agree with President Lacker that as long as we continue to purchase assets, were implementing a policy of further easing.  So I dont really see how were pulling back in any sense on that.  The liquidity programs are running off, but I see those as related to the panic. 
 For today I support alternative B with some caveats.  Like President Plosser, I think we should retain the up to language to retain flexibility.  Im talking about transitioning to a slow pace of purchases, but not to zero, in a reasonable time frame.  We may end up at a level of anywhere between $1 trillion to $1.25 trillion, but it does not have to be $1.25 trillion.  For the agency debt, it may be reasonable to stop short of the $200 billion, given the market disruption and the difficulties there. So, like Governor Kohn, I would want to retain flexibility by keeping the up to language. I prefer the second quarter of 2010 for the transition.  I guess my idea was, at least for today, that would give us some room to continue to adjust our program at future meetings and maybe move to this small flow purchases model at some future date. And, lastly, I think it is entirely appropriate, as in alternatives B and C, to mention the stability of inflation expectations in paragraph 2 when talking about the inflation outlook.  In my view, this better reflects modern theories of inflation determination and, I think, views around the table. I think most everyone talks about slack in the context of stable inflation expectations.  As I said yesterday, Im actually suspicious of how anchored these expectations really are.  I think were seeing a lot of faith in the Fed, even in the face of our unprecedented policy actions.  My sense is that informed opinion on inflation is as widely dispersed as it has been at any time since the 1970s in the United States.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, President Bullard, you said that you wanted to retain up to. Did you have a thought on the next sentence about the tapering that would fit with your 
proposal? MR. BULLARD. Starting with the red part? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Committee will gradually 
 MR. BULLARD. The Committee will gradually slow CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It says it will be completed. MR. BULLARD. I would like to leave it more open.  I dont have exact language. Was this what you were proposing, President Rosengren? MR. ROSENGREN. I was talking about putting a period after markets and taking out the last clause. MR. LACKER. Those seem consistent. MR. BULLARD. I wasnt sure if what he was suggesting was consistent with what I said. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren and President Yellen suggested saying gradually slow the pace of these purchases in order to promote a smooth transition in markets.  Let me just say now that I think that theres an important interaction between that decision and the up to decision. If were going to be unclear about our time frame and unclear about the final amount, those two things together are somewhat concerning.  But thats one possibility. MR. BULLARD. I guess my thought was just to take it to the second quarter and then, if you wanted to go this direction, you could do so at a future meeting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Mr. Chairman, a two-hander. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think that I have some sympathy with taking out the first quarter/second quarter, but we have to recognize that the Desk has to have instructions on what it actually has to do, so theres an issue of what their baseline is in terms of their action.  If we take out the language about first quarter/second 
  quarter, there still needs to be an understanding in terms of what is communicated to the Desk, so that at least they know the starting point of the taper trajectory. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I look at the circumstances that were in, I would prefer alternative C.  And I dont say that lightly, and I dont say it because I dont happen to be voting. I dont have to put it out therethats an issue sometimes. I think its important that we look at the stance of policy, and were in a very accommodative stance today.  And looking ahead to 2010, 2011, 2012, were still going to have 
a reasonably accommodative policy.  I recognize that the short-run costs are always right before us. And I dont want to stanch this recovery any more than anyone else does, and that is a major concern. I remember, perhaps unfortunately, sitting around worrying about 1 percent inflation in 2002 and 2003, worrying whether we would have deflation, and worrying about short-run issues 
as we kept rates low for an extended period of timeI think that was our language.  I just want to make sure that were thinking about the long-run costs of this much stimulus and of the difficulties we will face ahead in withdrawing it, because weve never before used these tools to neutralize this much stimulus.  We have enormous reserves in, and already some of the chasing 
yield has begun with this amount of funds out there and available.  We are taking on not only risk in the short term and on the downside, but, by delaying, we also are taking on longer-term risks, which may seem easier to take on precisely because they are longer term.  So Im very sensitive to that. I also am very sensitive to the fact that this might surprise the market, and that is a very serious worry. But at some point I think we need to surprise the market, to some degree, and that is why I was so interested in what the basis-point effect on mortgage rates would be as well as 
 the psychological effect. But I think its a risk that we need to take on at this point, because if we dont announce this now, we will be very close to year-end at our next meeting, and I dont think we can then say that were really pulling this stuff back.  At that point, I think wed be even more reluctant to do it. So now we can shoot for year-end.  We could tell them were not getting out now, and were going to move this very carefully towards year-end.  In the long run, I 
suspect that wed haveI cant say better outcomesreasonable outcomes. There are a couple of other things.  I would push for first quarterif at all possible.  Also, Im uneasy with the phrase extended period, because it has been such an issue with me in the past. So Ill end with that. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I infer that you want to keep the up to, though. 
MR. HOENIG. Up to, yes. [Laughter] Safe bet. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thats what I thought.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like so many others, Im also going to support alternative B. To me, its the stay-the-course alternative at this stage.  So many have said that the recovery is under way but fragile or tentative, so I think it is still appropriate to be cautious about that. And the inflation outlook, in my mind, doesnt warrant a policy response.  I think theres a great deal of consensus around the table about the state of the economy and the outlook, so it strikes me that this is really more about the language in the statement and the way we communicate with markets and the public, which is, to some degree, more in the realm of psychology. As I think about that, I certainly believe that paragraph 1 is sufficient to convey an accurate depiction of the economy as it stands today, and Im comfortable enough with it.  I do 
think its important to convey a commitment that we are going to stay the course, to follow 
  through. I think the removal of the up to language conveys this. I dont have terribly strong feelings about it, so Im certainly not going to argue strongly if the consensus is to keep it.  I do think its a small change, but it does help build confidence that well follow through with the programs that we have in place.  At this point, I dont think we want to suggest an itchy trigger finger regarding exit. I have a couple of other comments on the suggested language. Again, Im a bit ambivalent about the inclusion of the word wide.  I think it could generate a lot of speculation about what we mean by it, and I think continuing with the language of simply a range of tools, which is a little more measured, is adequate.   There are a lot of language revisions already on the table, and its going to be difficult to sort all of them out, so I wont add to them.  But I would make the final comment that the difference of opinion around the table is more about language than it is about the conditions.   And I agree with your comment, Mr. Chairman, on the need for a nuanced policy.  Im a little concerned about a too nuanced statement that tries to capture all of those sentiments.  So I tend to prefer much of whats on the page now and whats been proposed along with the removal of up to. I think that will convey the necessary continuity and follow-through that we want.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I submitted comments on September 16.  Many of them were incorporated in the statement.  I dont want to repeat myself.  I assume, Brian, they are somewhere in the record. Someone at the end of the table mentioned Hamlet and the Prince earlier, and it brought to mind the debate over the B-2 bomber, which was B-2 or not B-2, that is the question. 
    [Laughter] It seems to me that what this discussion is all about is up to or not up to, that is the question. By my count, we have had four in favor of keeping up to and four in favor of striking or deleting up to.  Im in favor of keeping up to, because I think it gives us maximum flexibility.  Im in favor of incorporating the phrase these purchases, and I would favor President Yellens executed by the end of the first quarter.  I would strike the word wide, because a range is a range.  I dont think wide adds much.  It does probably raise some questions of what other ideas we might have up our sleeves, and it might raise questions that we are not able to answer.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  It seems that this is the most disparate set of commentary Ive heard on policy alternatives.  Its a very interesting meeting, and I hope I can add to that spirit.  [Laughter] The economy is beginning the recovery phase. I think the risk profile is betterits more balanced.  That doesnt change the fact that its not a very desirable path, as many have pointed out; the unemployment rate is going to remain high for quite some time.  In terms of the inflation outlook, it seems to me that were going to be undershooting our implicit objective, in that were likely to stay below, I would say, a 1 percent inflation rate for some period of time.  There is a wide range of risk, as we have said, and, as President Yellen mentioned, by some estimates of the TIPS inflation compensation markets, compensations up, and that must mean that the variability in inflation is up, higher or lower. I find that quite interesting. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that, viewing the balance of the social costs that we are facing, those costs seem a little towards the downside.  With that in mind, looking at paragraph 1, my reaction was different from President Plossers and more like Governor Kohns 
  regarding the phrase, a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability. This seems to me the only place where we can possibly point out that the unemployment rate will remain high over some period of time.  The only other reference to job loss is with respect to its influence on consumption.  We could change resource utilization to something more like the unemployment rate will gradually decline, but Im not anticipating many people would prefer that type of language.  And I view the phrase in a context of price stability, as consistent with the observation that inflation is going to remain below 2 percent for a couple of years. We can disagree on that, but thats how I view that sentence, so I found it to be quite good. In terms of policy, I think were responding appropriately according to the circumstances.  Monetary policy is accommodative:  The federal funds rate is about zero, weve got our large-scale asset purchase programs, and theres no real expectation that the funds rate is going to rise in the foreseeable futurenine to twelve months, maybe it will be longer.  Im sympathetic to the arguments that the current path of the recovery is highly undesirablewed like a lower unemployment rate.  But I just think that there are limits to our policy effectiveness.  I think I am different from many of the views expressed here.  Given the limitations I see in our effectiveness at this point, I think were at a pretty good position, and I dont think that we can really do that much more. So I favor alternative B. Having heard some of the comments that you made, Mr. Chairman, and that the Vice Chairman made on our exit tools, at the end of the day, I do trust that our exit tools are going to be sufficient to allow us to embark upon a more restrictive policy when we deem that appropriate.  If we can sell our assets, I think that will work if interest on reserves doesnt work. 
 In terms of MBS, heres where Ill be different.  I prefer a definitive choice today.  I just dont see any benefit to postponing what strikes me as the inevitable purchase of $1 trillion after listening to everybody around the table.  I would be aghast if we found a way not to do $1 trillion. Why not recognize that now, inject a little more certainty into markets on that score?  I think that, if we leave it open, we are going to struggle with this issue later in terms of 
the rate effect. We dont fully appreciate why MBS yields are lower.  Is it the stock effect, or is it the flow effect?  Well, theres an unfortunate aspect to putting a lot of weight on the flow effectas Brian at one point said, maybe its 5050.  If its 5050, then, when we are done, those rates will go back up, because the flow will no longer be there.  If we have to look higher 
rates in the eye in the first quarter of next year, I think were going to be wringing our hands over it. Now, maybe thats the right thing.  I dont have a problem with being definitive now and then saying that circumstances are such that we need to apply more accommodation.  We did that all the time with the funds rate, and I just dont think that these policies ought to be that different.  So I would prefer a more definitive choice.  Because of that, I guess Ill make it five and fiveI would take out the up to. Well see how that goes.  I would like to complete it as soon as possiblein the first quarter, and I wouldnt mind the middle of the first quarterbut thats a minority view, Im sure.  I thought that President Plossers suggestion on moving the inflation 
expectations ahead of resource slack was perfectly acceptable, if there was any appetite for that.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  President Pianalto. 
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  It is good to see more data showing that the economy is on a path to recovery, but, as I noted earlier, the gains have been very limited, and the recovery remains quite fragile.  My view about the direction of 
   inflation is more balanced. Fortunately, inflation expectations have been a lot more stable than we might have anticipated even a few months ago, when we were concerned that inflation expectations would fall. I attribute this stability at least in part to our communications strategy.  Given the minimal extent of the recovery so far and the very moderate levels of inflation, I believe the continuation of our current accommodative policy is appropriate. Regarding the language in paragraph 3, I support inserting the word wide in the first sentence. I also think that we will be purchasing and should be purchasing the entire $1 trillion in mortgage-backed securities.  In addition, I think its important to be as transparent as we can be, so I would delete the up to in front of the $1 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities. I would obviously leave the up to in front of the $200 billion in agency debt.  Regarding the language on tapering our purchases, Brian Sackss comments and analysis 
yesterday moved me to support using the end of the first quarter language in that section.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  First Vice President Lyon. MR. LYON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also favor alternative B.  Although the recent data have generally surprised on the upside, Im hesitant to place too much emphasis on one or two months worth of data.  We have been unpleasantly surprised several times in the last two years, and in part, as a result, Im disinclined to change policy quite yet. I think that market expectations are particularly important at times like these, and I place a fair amount of weight on the fact that alternative B is most closely aligned with existing market expectations. In this regard, while I prefer the retention of the up to language due to its consistency with prior statements, I would not object to the removal of this language. 
    The tapering strategy for the purchases of agency MBS and agency debt specified in alternative B strikes me as prudent and appropriate.  I support ending these purchases in the first quarter of next year. Based on Brians presentation yesterday, I dont see the need or the justification to extend them further. Given that neither inflation nor inflation expectations have increased, worries about the size of our balance sheet seem to me to be premature.  In my view, we have viable exit strategies available that we can implement as conditions warrant.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill support alternative B with some suggestions, but Ill confine most of my remarks to the mortgage markets.  Let me begin by talking about this odd market dynamic, which, I think, is leading to much of the discussion around the table. The mortgage market strikes me as neither particularly sustainable in its current form nor two-sided, in the sense of matching private parties who meet at some market clearing price. And the blame for that is not even predominantly because of the Federal Reserves role in the market.   When I think about the mortgage market ecosystem, I break it into three parts.  The mortgage origination market, even dominated by three or four banks with different degrees of implicit and explicit support, is by far and away the most competitive market in this ecosystem compared with what Im going to talk about next.  In between the originators and the holders of these portfolios, we have this odd duopoly of government guarantors that are now competing with a new entity, the Federal Housing Administration, all of whom have confused and overlapping objective functions and confused exit regimes.  They cant say what theyre solving for, whether its minimizing draws from Treasury, maximizing the support of Congress, or 
 minimizing or changing the number of folks that go into foreclosure; the guarantors are in between this bizarre group of mortgage originators and buyers.  And who are the buyers?  Well, the buyers are us, that is, the Federal Reserve, the Treasury Department, and Fannie and Freddie, who have mixed views about whether theyre also going to be portfolio buyers of whole mortgages or mortgage-backed securities.  Taking all this together, I think we shouldnt be surprised that were having a hard time figuring out what the incremental change in spreads would be based on whether we do up to or not up to at various sizes. All of these pieces are subject to debate.  Markets are trying to figure out whos going to do what to whom and what the consequences of this bizarre ecosystem are, and noting that this market is not clearing in any effective way.  I would say again that we have participated in but are not predominant in that rather unfavorable diagnosis. In light of that dynamic and whats in the realm of the possible, we can talk about losses on our portfolio, and we can talk about complications for the exit strategy.  But I think, as one of the prior speakers made clear, that, for the purposes of this discussion, we can stipulate that we can and will figure it out. I have great confidence in that. It strikes me that the central question is:  What can we do to provide whatever help is in the realm of the possible to this targeted mortgage market?  I think its likely that, given the uncertainties that weve all spoken about regarding the real economy and financial markets in 2010, were going to have to provide support as best we can throughout much of the year.  This isnt support such that we say, Boy, once were done with the first quarter, all will be rosy thereafter. As a way to frame what the operative choices are in front of us, I ask myself:  What is most conducive to bringing private buyers back into this confused market in as seamless a way as possible?  Now, we shouldnt be surprised that markets want more.  Again, I said this with 
    Treasuries, and its equally true here because were doing more.  They want more purchases, more certainty, more commitment, and I think that that is as expected.  What should we want? I think we should be solving for bringing real investors back into this market to give it any chance of pricing mortgages at rates that are conducive to recovery.  So I think that brings us to the operative questions mostly in paragraph 3. With respect to the up to language, I learned from one of you that, in the academy, they say the debates are so angry because the stakes are so small.  I think thats true on the up to language here. Markets expect were going to do $1.25 trillion.  If we leave up to in there, 
theyre going to expect it, and if we take it out, they expect it, so I cant get all that energized over where to cast my vote in this very close call.  Because they already expect were going to do the whole thing and because we are reasonably comfortable with the progress from the last FOMC meeting to this one, I would have a mild preference for leaving up to in there, and I think that the differences in market practicality here are really quite small. What about the timing?  When should we end this or complete this exercise? I am generally in the category of flexibility, given these uncertainties, but taken to its extreme, I think the flexibility would give not only the Desk some concerns about what exactly theyre solving for, but also the markets.  Therefore, while Im sympathetic to the idea of extending this out, in general I think if we want market investors to get back in and to prepare to get back in, we should tell them when were planning on exiting this thing, because I think were going to have cliff effects at any point that we complete these purchases.  I suspect that we should give them as much notice as possible.  My preference, as a result, would be to say that we are going to complete or execute this by the end of the second quarter of 2010, giving full warning to them and to all of us about how to proceed. 
 As a final comment, Mr. Chairman, on the agency debt, I think the staff has been incredibly up front with us that were really making that market even harder to operate effectively.  I think the benefits that we are drawing from continuing to be in that market are particularly limited, if not zero.  So if I had the pen, I would actually end the increases in the agency debt side. I dont think thats the center of consensus around the table.  So just to be practical, you can leave that as up to as well.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Everybody around this table has more experience with these issues than I do  MR. TARULLO. No, thats not true.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  but Im struck as I look at the statements and as I listen to the discussion that it sounds like were doing one smooth maneuver that has been the same over a period of time when the underlying dynamics are really very different.  I would agree with President Lacker that the purchases of the MBS and the support of the housing markets has been smooth, has acted as a substitute for the financial markets that havent yet restarted.  But, on the other hand, the waxing and waning of programs on the asset side of the balance sheet are going to result in bursts of quantitative easing in the form of reserves, and were just beginning to see that. Given my impression that reserves are currently at desired levels, I think that it will result in some lowering of interest rates.  I would disagree with Governor Kohn on that, and then disagree with President Lacker and agree with President Yellen that this is not necessarily a bad thing, that its probably warranted by the conditions that we are facing.  Also, I would point out that while the TALF is supporting lending, on the one hand, our regulatory policies are generally acting to restrict credit, on the other, so those two things are working at cross-purposes, perhaps. 
With all of these different things going on, I have difficulty weighing the relative impact of each one on the final outcomes, but I do remain concerned that on balance were going to see too little credit availability leading to too much saving and a slower recovery than we would like.  So I do support alternative B. I think through tapering we actually are likely to learn a little bit more about the effects of stock versus flow, as well as about the bank response to this second big tranch of reserves coming in, so it certainly would be possible in the future to argue for an extension into the second quarter, but Im not sure whether that would be through more gradual tapering or through an increase in the purchases. I think it just depends on how those develop. In keeping with my banker roots, I do find paragraph 1 awfully rosy compared with the reservations that were expressed in the policy round, but I dont have any changes to offer. I would delete the up to language, but, again, Im not sure Im terribly strongly in favor of that; I would probably also use the first quarter, again, saying that in the future I may prefer the second quarter. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B, although, like President Yellen, not without some reluctance.  I have two difficulties with the language of alternative B as drafted.  In paragraph 1, although I think it does reflect accurately our sense of the current trajectory of the economy, I dont think it captures the level of uncertainty about what may happen next year, and thus I would be substantially more comfortable with an explicit indication of that uncertainty. With respect to paragraph 3, I think President Bullard captured the most important point from my point of view, which is that the world should understand that were prepared to respond as required by economic circumstances.  I worry that there is a sense of finality that is projected 
in the language as currently drafted, and I dont think it turns on the up to language for the reasons that Governor Warsh suggested.  I think it turns more upon the way its stated and, to be perfectly honest, upon a lot of external commentary which has begun to impute a certain finality to us. So whether through the mechanism that President Bullard suggested, or President Rosengren suggested, or some other means, I would be substantially more comfortable with alternative B if it states in more or lessand I say more or less given that we are a central bankexplicit fashion that we are prepared to respond to changing economic conditions, so that people do understand this is not final in the sense that, even if things begin to deteriorate next year, were not going to think theres a high hurdle rate because, after all, we ended that program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I guess I would note that we are proposing to retain the last sentence; I realize that if you repeat a sentence too many times it begins to lose meaning. MR. TARULLO. That is exactly my idea of it.  People look at the deltas, I think. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I just want to talk to some points that President Plosser raised about inflation expectations.  I completely agree that inflation expectations matter. I think we have to be careful, though, that our concern about 
inflation expectations does not imply to others that well be forced to take back accommodation sooner. On the inflation expectations front, we can actually make considerable progress by explaining to people clearly why we can exit. I thought it was interesting that everyone here has 
stipulated that we can exit, but I dont think that the market believes that everybody on this Committee believes that we can exit.  I think it would be helpful to the markets if we did explain 
 that, and that would help keep inflation expectations more anchored.  I also think that we could help keep inflation expectations better anchored by explaining that we think inflation will be subdued given the large output gap. We can actually accomplish both goalsexplain our policy a little better and work at keeping inflation expectations anchored.  So I think communication is something that we need to continue to work on.  Weve made quite a bit of progress this summeryour speech and testimony, Mr. Chairman, on the exit strategy helped.  But I think the more people who are confident that we can manage our exit, the more helpful it will be on the inflation expectations front. Yesterday I was hoping to talk about large-scale asset purchases.  [Laughter] Now as next to the last speaker, I think Im going to be very repetitive, but I do think its important to commit to do the entire $1 trillion, and a lot of people already touched on the reasons.  Governor Kohn talked about the fact that the trajectory of the unemployment rate is still unsatisfactory, and I completely agree. Its less unsatisfactory than it was before, but its still very unsatisfactory, so taking back any sort of accommodation that is discretionary to us at this meeting seems inappropriate.  In terms of the specific reasons that I was going to give yesterday, the first is that this is whats expected.  If we dont do what the market expects in this case, it would lead to an inadvertent tightening of financial conditions, and not just directly in terms of the effects on agency MBS yields because of the potential lack of additional purchases, but also because it would be a new signal that were closer to exit in a broader sense.  Remember, if you compare where the market is in terms of the timing of raising the federal funds rate and where the Greenbook is, theres a pretty big gap. So, for the market to be surprised, were going to have to move faster than the market expects.  It seems to be a pretty strong presumption that were probably going to go slower than the market expects. 
  Second, we are pretty far along in this program, so this idea of not completing it gets difficult if you also want to do tapering that lasts through the end of the first quarter.  By the end of this week we will have purchased, what, $895 billion roughly? That leaves $355 billion, with twenty-seven weeks until the end of the first quarter.  That means weve been purchasing at $25 billion a week, roughly, up to now.  If we decided to do the whole amount, were still cutting the rate of purchases roughly in half over the next six months.  If you imagine that we cut the purchases to $20 billion a week between now and the next meeting, wed only have about $235 billion left at the next meeting, and then wed have to say:  Well, do we really want to have the taper be so dramatic that we cannot actually do the whole program?  I just think that we have to recognize that were so far along in this program that its extraordinarily likely that were going to want to complete it.  In that case, I dont really see the benefit of retaining this very small degree of optionality relative to the high probability that were actually going to go through with this program. Last, this is a new point, surprisingly, although Brian did raise it in his comments yesterday. When we did implement the tapering language for the Treasury purchase program,, we also committed to do the entire $300 billion at the same time.  So there is a risk, and I dont know how big a risk it isprobably a slight riskthat if we dont take the up to language out, the market may note the difference:  We committed to the entire amount when we did tapering with the Treasury purchase program, and in this case, wed be committed to tapering but wed keep the up to language in. I think that will create unnecessary ambiguity that will create some risk. So obviously Im in favor of taking the up to language out.  In terms of the other language, I have some sympathy with this idea of being a little bit more vague, but my problem with that is, how does the Desk then know what to do.  I think theres a bit of a tension there.  I 
 dont think theres that big a problem bringing back the purchase programs.  If the economy behaves in a really bad way, I think the market would probably expect it.  I think if we say by the end of the first quarter that doesnt really rule out bringing it back if things go adversely. On the question of wide range, I agree with Governor Kohn.  I think all available tools is the broadest phrase. Wide is less broad.  Range is less broad than that.  I think it makes sense for us to err on that intermediate step, and maybe we can go to a range of tools two or three meetings from now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, before you do your summary, Id like to put something back on the table that really hasnt been addressed as much as I think it needs to be.  I raised it yesterday, and President Lacker raised it today, and thats this issue of the SFP program and the importance it plays; in fact, it will be adding more stimulus to our balance sheet and more reserves to the economy.  The Treasury has the authority to make this decision at the end of the day, and if this Committee is consciously choosing not to sterilize that and, therefore, increase stimulus, then we need to acknowledge that we are choosing to do that rather than accepting it 
passively. Its not clear whether the discussion about the increase in stimulus around this table and the options for providing it have been under the premise that the SFP is going to be there.  As you suggested yesterday, when you alluded to this and talked about it briefly, it is important that this Committee make an active decision to accept that additional stimulus, if thats what the Committee so chooses, or to reject it and sterilize it.  But I would not like that to be just sort of skipped over and accepted without a conscious discussion about how we think that fits into our broader strategy. Thats my issue, Mr. Chairman. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Well, let me try to summarize.  First on the substance, weve all agreed that the intermeeting data were more favorablethats a great relief, and I think to some extent it validates the approach we took back in March.  If we had known in March where wed be today, I think we would be reasonably relieved about it.  So I think thats all encouraging. That being said, as I mentioned in my go-round comments on the outlook, the economy does remain quite weak, certainly quite far from meeting our maximum employment objective. And there are costs on the downsideand Im not talking about an insurance argument here; Im talking about the neutral-risk size of the costs.  I think the downside risks are still dangerous, because on the downside lies the possibility of renewed financial crisis, and, of course, the marginal cost of higher unemploymentor less employmentis greater when youre starting from such an adverse position. So I dont think that scaling back stimulus significantly at this meeting is warranted.  Having said that, I see it as a nuanced situation.  I think its not right to say that we are going full bore and not in the process of exiting.  We have both actively and passively allowed the rundown of substantial amounts of our liquidity programs, and my own assumption is that, as the early 2010 deadline comes around, we will, in fact, close many, if not most, of those programs.  Second, we have ended the Treasury program.  So I think its clearweve talked a good bit about exitto the markets and the public that we are in a mode now of thinking about 
the exit and have taken some concrete steps in that direction. A second point thats come up, which I think is an interesting one, is, to put it most bluntly, the question of whether completing the $1 billion of MBS purchases is a further easing or a staying in place.  Because Ive been focused on the asset side and on the effects on interest rates, I guess I would conclude that its closer to staying in place than it is to a further easing. 
First, mortgage rates have been fairly constant throughout this entire program, and I think that what well be seeing when we stop the program is probably some backup in mortgage rates, so that measure of ease has been constant over the period of the program.  In fact, whether you believe in a stock effect or a flow effect, either one would suggest that, if you were to cut back your planned purchases, it would cause rates to rise, and it would be a tightening relative to expectations. Now, the quantitative easing theory is a little bit more ambiguous.  If were putting more reserves into the system, then arguably that is a further easing.  But I have two observations.  One is that those effects may be small, and the other is, as Governor Duke mentioned, that its uncertain to what extent the effects of that are anticipated in the markets already.  So its a complicated question.  My own feeling is that if we were to adopt something like alternative C and actively cut back on our plan today, not only would it be tightening in the sense of pulling back on the asset-purchase program, but it also would send a very strong signal that we were very close to exit, and I still dont think were there yet.  So I do think that our options really are to continue with the program, and one of the key decisions that we have is exactly how to describe how were going to go forward with the program at this point. Now, theres the other side of the question that President Yellen and Governor Tarullo and others mentioned.  If were unsatisfied with the situation and we think the federal funds rate ought to be minus 4 percent, why arent we doing even more? Here again, I dont think we should rule that out, but I feel some sympathy to what President Evans said, which is that, given all the uncertainties we have and the issues about our balance sheet and exit and our uncertainties about the effects of these programs, its not obvious that we do have a lot of ammunition left even on this unconventional dimension.  Having said that, I think we should obviously keep this 
  possibility alive if the situation warrants it, but its not clear to me at this point we should be doing more either.  So I do support the language in alternative B, but there are a couple of decisions that we need to make. To get to the most substantive one first, Im not sure, Governor Tarullo, if I got your vote on the up to language, but, excluding your vote, I think I have five for keeping up to, six for dropping it, and four who were split evenly between slightly favored one or the other. Did you have a preference? MR. TARULLO. Yes. I think it depends for me, ultimately, Mr. Chairman, on what other language might change.  Were you to tell me that no other language was going to change and I get to do up to or not, I would want it out. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Im happy to take another straw vote, but personally I lean slightly towards taking it out on the grounds of market certainty and on the argument that the Vice Chairman made, namely, that by November we will in any case be already up to $1 trillion, and we wont have a lot of flexibility to fall short.  But frankly, Im with President LockhartI think its a pretty close call, and I dont think it necessarily is a first-order issue, but we do need to resolve it. So if its okay, I think Id like to take a straw vote of the full Committee including all participants.  President Plosser, is that okay with you? MR. PLOSSER. Thats okay, but there are two elements to this. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. MR. PLOSSER. One is the up to and the other is how long we extend it for.  So Im trying to figure out whether we want to treat those separately. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. 
MR. PLOSSER. For some of us that might be dependent. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So I think if we keep up to, again, and we taper, I think we ought to have an end date at a minimum.  If we take away the end date, then theres just too much uncertainty involved.  So lets talk for a moment about the end date.  Brian, how strong is the preference of the Desk for the first quarter?  What arguments can you make about first quarter versus what I think are the two other options weve heard: One is end of second quarter and the other is in the second quarter, the difference being, I guess, that the end of second quarter theoretically could encompass a much earlier decline. MR. SACK. I think even using the end of first quarter provides a six-month tapering period, which is actually pretty long.  The concerns I raised in the briefing were that a longer tapering period certainly will require a much steeper drop-off in the pace of purchases in the near term.  As policymakers, the risk to be taken into consideration is whether that will actually prompt a quicker backup in mortgage rates. My main point was that, from a market functioning perspective, I thought Q1 is a sufficient tapering period. So I wouldnt use market functioning as an argument for going all the way to Q2. I think that decision would have to be based instead on market effects and policy flexibility and things that fall in your domain, not mine. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have the following proposed compromise on that.  President Yellen correctly made an interesting suggestion of replacing completed with executed, and the reason that matters is that unlike Treasuries, MBS take weeks to clear, so if we execute by the end of the first quarter, that means the balance sheet effects will probably go 
into the second quarter.  Is that going to be okay?  All right, so lets take that as given, if we will, 
that were going to execute these things by the end of the first quarter.  Then conditional on that, can I have a straw vote on whether to keep up to.  Those in favor of keeping up to, please 
    raise your hand. I see one, two, three, four, five. Those in favor of dropping up to? One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.  The preference is to drop up to.  That has the advantage of being parallel to the Treasury language and creating some more certainty. That all being said, I think its always clear that we have flexibility.  We have a last sentence here that says well be reviewing the timing and purchase of securities, so I dont think we have abandoned flexibility. I for one certainly would be open to adjusting the program if we do see significant changes in the outlook in the next few weeks. Yes, President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Taking out up to is a firm commitment to the program.  If we were to see some problems in banking markets caused by the expansion of reserves, would we consider running off Treasuries, or selling Treasuries, in order to drain reserves?  Is that an element of flexibility that remains on the table? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Actually, thats a good question, and I was going to respond to President Plossers point. MR. LACKER. Its related to this question as well. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. So I think there are a couple of things going on there.  First, its my expectation that the SFP program will come back after the debt ceiling issue is resolved, although, of course, as I said, we shouldnt count on that definitively.  Second, these programsthe reverse repos, the term deposits, these tools that we want to have in placeI think we ought to put them into operation on some small scale early, that is, if possible, by the end of the year or early next year, just so that we can be assured that they work and the market can see that they work. So I would encourage staff to keep that goal in mind.  I think that would give us certainly an additional wayand this actually corresponds to about the time that the SFP 
 is going to run down around the end of the yearto fine-tune if reserves were becoming a concern; of course, we could always sell Treasuries.  MR. PLOSSER. Excuse me. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Im just trying to make sure I understand.  Does that mean that your view would be that, in the absence of the return of the SFP program, we would actually use these 
tools to offset, in effect, that increase in stimulus or increase in reserves thats happening? Is that what Im hearing you say, or is it something different? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What Im saying is that, in any event, we ought to start these programs on a small scale to assure ourselves that they work.  If the SFP program doesnt come back, then I agree that, as you said, we ought to actively decide about how much reserves we want in the system. I think President Lacker raised the possibility that the high level of reserves was actually causing some kind of dysfunction or problem.  Ill tell you my bias:  $185 billion in reserves 
from a macro stimulus point of view is not that big a deal.  It might be a bigger deal in terms of market function or banking function.  In that case, there would be a good reason to explain to the markets why were doing this operation without necessarily changing the overall intent or the thrust of our policy. So, yes, we then could use one of several methods if the Committee decided to offset some of that. MR. PLOSSER. I guess Im being difficult, but Im worried about the perception of the marketplace, namely, that we are passively accepting an increase of $185 billion of reserves without an active decision by this Committee to do so.  If we do anticipate that SFP comes back, 
in some ways that eases our exit strategies, and I understand why that may, in fact, be desirable.  
  But given the political interaction between debt ceilings and other things, do we want it to go away or do we want it to come back?  Those are knotty, little questions about how then we manage these extra reserves in terms of this Committees view of policy going forward. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well have the tools to manage it.  As for market expectations, because of our communication, for better or worse, I think expectations are mostly formed around the size of the purchase programs and not the size of the reserves in the banking system.  Because theres no way to keep the purchase programs and reduce the reserves, were effectively locked into that. There were a couple of other things that I might as well ask about.  There was the question of wide range versus not having wide range, and I guess the argument is its somewhat less jarring to go to a wide range, but again, I dont think this is a first-order issue. Would anyone like to comment on that before I ask for a straw vote?  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. I thought Vice Chairman Dudley laid it out well, and I hadnt thought of it so cleanly, but there are essentially three degrees of emphasis here.  One is the old language, I gather, which would have been all available tools, then wide range is sort of the middle ground, and range is the weakest.  Is that the way you thought of it? So were actually moving from all available tools to something else. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You raised it. I mean, is that how you thought of it? MR. KOHN. Yes. I thought that backing away from all available tools would be seen as a consequential step in that the Committee, as the Chairman said, was at least putting the exit strategy into place, even though it wasnt executing it, so I guess I have a mild preference for including wide. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Any other comments on wide? MR. LACKER. Well, theres narrow range, and wide is in between narrow and [laughter] MR. PLOSSER. Or we could say broad range, which is in between CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  [Laughter]  Im putting an end to this.  Let me ask how many are in favor of putting in wide. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Just for the record, how many are against it?  One, two, three. Okay. So lets include wide. I think those are the major decisions. I will comment on the first paragraph.  We had some views on both sides, that is, whether it was too cheery or not cheery enough, whether it was certain enough or uncertain enough.  Im at a little bit of a loss as to where to go with it.  I felt the comments were pretty balanced around where we were, but if anyone else would like to address that.  Would you like to address that, Governor Tarullo? MR. TARULLO. Yes, but I dont get the sense that anybody else has any appetite for it, so I dont want to take peoples time up.  After Although economic activity is likely to remain 
weak for a time, I would have inserted, and there remains considerable uncertainty as to future economic performance, the Committee anticipates that CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, I understand. I think the likely to remain weak probably conveys a lot of your uncertainty. MR. TARULLO. Its the same point, I think, that you made before, which is that there is language which has been in there for a while, but now we have cheered up the rest of the paragraph. Just as in paragraph 3, the language in the last sentence has been in there for a while, 
 but weve firmed up the rest of the paragraph.  Thats why I was hoping for at least mildly offsetting phraseology changes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I would just comment that we do have this phrase that household spending will be constrained by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. So we have some caveats in there about weaknesses that are inherent in the economy already in this paragraph. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If we wanted to fine-tune, one other suggestionand I promise this is the last thingin the sentence beginning businesses are still cutting back, there is the part about slower pace.  We could go back to the August language, which says, Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment and staffing, but they are continuing to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales.  So it would be the same sentence as last time, and we would eliminate one element of cheeriness from the description. Is there any interest in that? MR. TARULLO: Even Im not interested in that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. I think we, I hope, have executed effective directive wording. MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I have some suggested wording for that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. 
MR. MADIGAN. But before we get to that, could I ask about paragraph 2? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Sure. 
MR. MADIGAN. Are we taking that as it is here or not? 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We could reverse the order.  The way its written, President Plosser, its intended to say that these are both necessary conditions, that theyre both part of the model. One version we had earlier started off by saying longer-term inflation expectations are stable, and substantial resource slack is likely to continue dampening cost pressures.  Therefore, the Committee. . . .  I dont think thats any better from your perspective. MR. PLOSSER. No, for my purposes, I was trying to get some more conditionality into it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. MR. PLOSSER. The degree to which slack will damp pressures is conditional on these anchored expectations, and thats the message I was trying to instill by reversing the order. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What weve done, of course, is added inflationary expectations to the description. MR. PLOSSER. I acknowledged that was a step forward.  I thought that was great. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Anything else?   All right, Brian, would you like to read the statement? MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could refer everybody to page 3 of my briefing materials and make sure that everybody agrees on whats being changed.  No change to 
paragraph 1. No change to paragraph 2. In paragraph 3:  inclusion of the word wide; several lines down, deletion of the phrase up to; a few more lines down, substitution of the word executed for completed just before the bracket, and inclusion of the phrase by the end of the first quarter. No other changes, I believe, to the statement. MR. EVANS. Can I ask just one question? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
  MR. EVANS. By using the word execute in the same sentence, were going to refer to executed for the MBS but completed for Treasuries.  Any CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think the market people will figure out the difference, right? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Because its settlement issues. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Were using the language thats technically correct.  Brian, is that right? Do you have any problem with this? MR. SACK. No, I dont have a problem.  I dont think its a massive source of confusion if it says completed, but I have no problem with executed either. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, on the directive. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. MADIGAN. Im on page 8 of my handout, directive 4, alternative B.  To reflect the use of the word execute in the statement, in the middle of the paragraph Id suggest that we 
break the sentence beginning the Desk is expected into two sentences so that the first sentence would end at after the end of October.  That is, The Desk is expected to complete purchases of about $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of October, period.  It is also expected to execute purchases of up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter.  That applies execute to both debt and MBS, but I dont think thats a problem. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, and let me just remind everybody that were retaining up to for the agency debt. I think the sense of the Committee, Brian, is that well continue to slow that down. We may well not want to go to the full amount of that category. 
  All right. Any other comments? Matt, can you call the roll? MR. LUECKE. Yes. This vote will encompass alternative B with the changes described by Brian Madigan, as well as directive B, also with the changes described by Brian Madigan. Chairman Bernanke  Yes Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes Governor Duke Yes President Evans Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Lacker Yes 
President Lockhart Yes 
Governor Tarullo Yes 
Governor Warsh Yes 
President Yellen  Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Matt, do you know if the lunch is ready at 12:30? MR. LUECKE. The lunch is ready now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will be heading up to lunch for our colleague Gary Stern. As I said yesterday, in December well have a presentation on inflation dynamics.  Our next meeting is November 3 and 4.  With nothing else, the meeting is adjourned. END OF MEETING 
               
 
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 34, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 3, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, November 4, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Mr. Luecke, Assistant SecretaryMr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist 
Mr. Stockton, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate Economists Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors 
      
  
      
 _______________   Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Leahy, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Mr. Palumbo, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Ihrig, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Ms. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Messrs. Fuhrer and Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland, respectively Mr. Barkema, Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Mr. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Mr. Burke and Ms. Yucel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, respectively  Ms. Sbordone and Mr. Sill, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia, respectively Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  Attended portion of the meeting relating to financial developments, open market operations, and System facilities. 
    Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on November 34, 2009 November 3, 2009Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody.  As has been our custom recently, this is a joint BoardFOMC meeting.  Can I get a motion to close the meeting? MR. KOHN. So moved. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We would like to welcome to the table President Kocherlakota from Minneapolis.  Narayana is a very distinguished scholar.  Everyone who is familiar with modern economics would know his name and his work.  He is new to the 
FOMC but not to the Fed. You have been a staff member and a research consultant in Minneapolis for more than a decade.  So we look very much forward to working with you and getting the benefit of your insight. Welcome. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks a lot.  I am honored to be here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The first item on our agenda is financial developments, open market operations, and [laughter] MR. PLOSSER. Actually, Ben, this is for you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let the record show that President Plosser is wearing a Phillies hat. [Laughter] We dont take sides here in Washington.  All right. MR. PLOSSER. I thought we have all Red Sox fans and all Mets fans with us.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let me turn to Brian Sack for a report on financial developments, open market operations, and System credit facilities.  Brian. 
                                                       1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). MR. SACK.1 Thank you. The surge in the prices of risky assets that has taken place since March cooled off over the intermeeting period, as investors took note of the economic risks that remain and the ongoing difficulties facing the financial sector.  As shown in the top left panel of the first exhibit, broad equity indexes declined modestly, on net, since the last FOMC meeting.  That is a notable downshift from the gains posted over the previous four intermeeting periods, which averaged over 8 percent per period. The drop in equity prices occurred despite favorable earnings surprises for the third quarter. As shown in the top right panel, more than 80 percent of the firms in the S&P 500 index beat expectationsan unusually high portion by historical standards. However, investors also focused on the growth of revenue, which was generally less impressive, and questioned the sustainability of profit growth.  Moreover, equity prices no longer benefited from the substantial upward revisions to the economic outlook that had propelled earlier gains.  Indeed, recent economic data have been seen as mixed, and the GDP forecasts of most market participants were essentially unchanged from the previous FOMC meeting, as indicated in the dealer survey responses in the middle left panel. One factor weighing on stocks was a growing concern among investors about prospects for financial firms.  Banks earnings reports continued to highlight many of the problems facing that sector, and investors also became increasingly concerned about how pending regulatory changes would affect those institutions.  As a result, 
financial shares lost ground over the intermeeting period, as shown in the middle right panel. Nonfinancial firms continued to be seen as relatively healthy.  Indeed, yield spreads on corporate bonds narrowed further over the intermeeting period, although at a less rapid pace than earlier in the year, as shown in the bottom left panel.  Overall, despite their sharp gains from earlier in the year, we do not see equity or corporate bond prices as stretched well beyond fundamental values.  This can be seen in the Boards equity premium measure, shown to the right, which is wide by historical standards. It is also reflected in recent work by the New York Fed staff on high-yield bonds, suggesting that those yield spreads are near the levels expected given the outlook for defaults. Our assessment is that, overall, the levels of U.S. asset prices appear reasonable.   Nevertheless, this assessment could change if the very rapid gains from earlier in the year were to continue.  In this regard, the flattening out of asset prices since the last meeting could be regarded as a favorable development, as it suggests that those prices are still connected to fundamentals. As shown in the next exhibit, Treasury yields were little changed, on balance, since the last FOMC meeting.  In part, this pattern reflects that the incoming economic news has been mixed and has not provided any clear direction for yields.  Investors also took note of the considerable volume of commentary by Fed officials.  
As shown in the top right panel, FOMC members gave no less than 30 speeches in the month of October.  Im all for Central Bank transparency, but this may be going a bit 
   far. [Laughter] Many of those speeches were seen by the markets as containing directional information about the likely course of monetary policy, and investors saw some of those messages as conflicting with one another.  In part for this reason, investors marked down the grade they gave you on communications in our dealer survey. Despite all of the focus on these speeches, the implied policy path was little changed, on net, as shown in the middle left panel.  Investors continue to expect policy to remain on hold until at least the middle of 2010. This accommodative policy stance is one of the factors that market participants see as contributing to the decline in the dollar from earlier this year, as shown in the middle right panel.  The degree of angst about the dollar seems to have been building in recent months, as its weakness has been widely discussed among market participants. A key policy question is whether the dollar movement reflects an appropriate response to the outlook for the economy and policy or whether it is the beginning of a more abrupt decline that could ultimately produce a problematic increase in inflation or inflation expectations.  We lean toward the former explanation. The decline to date has been smooth and orderlyat a pace not much different from that seen before the fall of 2008.  In fact, over this intermeeting period, the dollar was essentially flat against our major trading partners.  Moreover, some of the recent weakening reflects an unwinding of the surge in the dollar that took place during the financial crisis. It is also worth noting that currency options markets do not seem to be pricing in considerable odds of an abrupt dollar decline, as indicated in the pricing of risk-reversals against the euro, in the bottom left panel.  These do not show a premium for protection against sizable dollar depreciation, and in fact, are now pointed in the opposite direction.  That said, we are mindful of the risks that are present, given the widespread focus of investors on this issue. Moreover, the Treasury market is pricing in a bit more inflation protection than was the case at the last FOMC meeting.  As shown in the bottom right panel, some measures of forward breakeven inflation rates have turned higher of late, though they are still within historical ranges.  In any event, we will closely monitor these markets for any signs that a more definitive correlation between dollar weakness and inflation expectations is developing.  As covered in your next exhibit, the Desk completed the last of its scheduled Treasury purchase operations last week. I thought it would be useful to provide a summary of the program and to discuss its effects.  In total, the Desk conducted sixty outright purchase operations in Treasury securities, bringing the cumulative total purchases to $300 billion on the nose. The top left panel shows the pace of purchases that we implemented over the program, including the tapering of the purchases at the end of the program.  The top right panel shows the distribution of the securities purchased across maturities.  As was announced in a Desk statement at the start of the program, the purchases spanned all outstanding maturities beyond a year, but the 
majority of securities purchased were in the two- to ten-year sector.  With these purchases, the Desk removed a considerable portion of the duration that was issued to the market over that period.  
   The middle two panels indicate that market functioning has improved over the period covered by the purchase program.  The left panel shows the amount of dispersion across Treasury yields relative to our smoothed yield curve, which could be taken as a proxy for the degree to which balance sheet constraints and extreme risk aversion prevented relative value trading in the market.  This measure has come in notably, with many attributing some of that pattern to our purchases.  Liquidity measures for the Treasury market have also improved.  Bid-asked spreads have also come in from the high levels earlier this year, and the depth of market quotes, shown to the right, has risen. Overall, the Treasury market has recovered notably from the strains during the crisis, and there are no signs that our pullback from the market is causing that improvement to reverse.  The other key issue is whether the Treasury purchases, along with the other LSAP programs, were successful at lowering longer-term yields.  Some have pointed to the fact that the 10-year Treasury yield has risen since the onset of purchases and have used that fact to argue that the program was not effective.  We do not find that 
argument particularly compelling.  The problem is that it fails to define the counterfactual of what would have happened to yields in the absence of the purchases. In fact, many regression models of longer-term yields would have predicted them to rise over this period.  This can be seen from a modification of the BackusWright yield model from their 2007 Brookings publication, shown in the 
bottom left panel.  The fact that yields remain below the models prediction is at least suggestive that the asset purchases have had some effect.  A different approach to measuring the effects of asset purchases is based on event-study.  As was presented to the Committee earlier in the year, this exercise takes a list of dates on which important announcements were made about LSAPs and aggregates the movements in yields on those dates. The updated results, shown in the bottom right panel, indicate that the yield movements around LSAP announcements were substantial.  Together, the regression and event-study evidence suggests that LSAP programs have had 
notable effects in lowering Treasury yields.  We associate these effects primarily with changes to the stock of securities, arising through a portfolio balance channel, and hence we would not expect them to unwind as purchases end.  To date, that appears to 
be playing out. Indeed, the market barely noticed the end of the Treasury purchase programwhich is what we had hoped would happen.  As I noted in the last briefing, we are somewhat more worried about how the markets will react to the winding down of the agency debt and MBS purchase programs.  Even in those markets, however, the basic message is so far so good.  The top panels of exhibit 4 show the pace of purchases for agency debt and MBS.  As can be seen, the Desk has begun to follow the tapering program that was decided at the last FOMC meeting.  This strategy will slowly reduce the pace of purchases while still getting to total levels consistent with the Desk directives. For MBS, the projected path takes total purchases to $1.25 trillion.  For agency debt, the Desk directive had given us some flexibility, but we were following a path aimed at a total purchase amount of $175 billion. 
    As could be seen in the event-study results, the effects of the LSAPs appear to have been even greater on agency securities and MBS than on Treasury securities, causing those spreads to narrow. The middle panels show the history of spreads on the two asset classes. As we have noted before, spreads relative to Treasury securities appear unusually tight. Part of the concern of market participants is that the purchase programs have driven spreads to these narrow levels and that the end of the programs will cause them to move back to historical norms, pushing agency securities and MBS rates higher. However, it is hard to judge the magnitude of this risk.  In that regard, it is worth noting that the MBS spread does not look unusually narrow when measured relative to swaps, as shown to the left.  MBS purchases may have an additional effect on MBS rates beyond their influence on option-adjusted spreads.  Purchases of MBS not only remove duration from the market; they also remove prepayment risk.  Investors generally find it challenging to hold the negative convexity of MBS associated with prepayment risk, and hence they demand an extra return to bear that risk, which keeps MBS rates higher than they would otherwise be. The removal of a considerable amount of this risk by the Feds purchases could therefore work to lower MBS rates by offsetting this effect. Accordingly, it might be useful to watch the pricing of instruments that markets use to hedge this risk, such as the implied volatility from swaptions shown in the bottom left panel, to see if they come under any upward pressure as the Fed backs away from its MBS purchases.   Lastly, I would like to make a note about the distribution of our MBS purchases.  There was a period earlier this year when refinancing activity led to a greater amount of production of new MBS with coupons of 4 and 4.5 percent.  The Desk strategy taken at that time was to concentrate purchases in those coupons in order to soak up the new supply and facilitate this refinancing.  This can be seen in the current distribution of our MBS holdings, the dark blue bars in the bottom right panel.  More recently, we have begun to spread out our purchases into higher coupons and plan to 
continue to do so. This strategy is reflected in the distribution of holdings that we project for the end of the program, shown by the light blue bars.  The purpose of this 
shift is to achieve greater diversification in our holdings across coupons.  The higher-coupon securities will be relatively more liquid than the lower-coupon securities in the event that mortgage rates increase, which could prove useful if the Committee 
wants to engage in larger amounts of dollar rolls or to conduct outright sales.  These asset-purchase programs have pushed the total size of the balance sheet up to about $2.2 trillion, as shown in the top left panel of the last exhibit.  Outright asset holdings now account for about $1.7 trillion of that total.  It is this component of the balance sheet that presents the most significant exit challenges, as those holdings will run off only slowly on their own and will therefore keep reserves in the banking 
system for a long time.  The staffs work on developing tools for draining reserves and for raising short-term interest rates is advancing well, as Jim Clouse and Chris Burke will cover in their briefings.  And the market seems generally to accept that we 
   
   
  have sufficient tools to exit. However, market participants are increasingly looking for guidance on how the tools will be usedfor example, what will be the timing of reserves draining relative to increases in the IOER rate and what quantity of reserves will be taken out of the system.  As shown to the right, the Desk asked dealers about the likelihood of various tools being used to drain reserves. Not surprisingly, respondents placed high odds on the FOMC using reverse repurchase agreements and term deposits.  What was more surprising was that the respondents put about 50 percent odds on using outright asset sales as well. However, there was considerable disagreement about the likelihood of asset sales, with the responses ranging from 5 percent to 100 percent odds, as indicated by the line. In contrast, the exit from liquidity facilities is already well along toward completion.  Those facilities were priced to facilitate their wind-down.  As shown in the middle left panel, that process has worked well, as the improvement in money market functioning and the abundant supply of reserves have made our programs unattractive to most borrowers, leading to a dramatic shrinking in the volume of activity at those programs.  Currently, only four of the programs have any outstanding 
volume, with the total amount of credit totaling about $200 billion.  Although the exit design has worked well overall, it might require some effort to get the remaining balances to shrink to zero in an orderly way.  Indeed, as I pointed out in my last briefing, the Fed faces an adverse-selection problem in which the remaining firms are the ones with more-limited opportunities to obtain outside financing. With this in mind, the Federal Reserve staff has begun to engage the firms remaining in the facilities on a bilateral basis to encourage them to plan for transitioning away from the Feds facilities. These discussions have already helped this process notably.  The remaining firms have received a clearer signal that such a 
transition is necessary and have made progress toward developing alternative liquidity plans. As indicated in the middle right panel, the number of firms remaining in the facilities has declined, and we will continue to engage those remaining firms to ensure a smooth exit.  I will close by discussing another issue in money marketsthe approaching year-end. The bottom left panel shows the estimated effect of the year-end on the two-
month LIBOR rate and compares it with the levels observed at this point during past year-end periods. Unlike previous year-ends, we are not seeing much upward pressure on the LIBOR rate. This observation could reflect the fact that the demand for unsecured credit is fairly limited given the abundance of reserves and liquidity in the system.  Where we may see some unusual behavior over the year-end is in the Treasury market.  It is possible that the heightened demand for safe assets will cause Treasury 
bill yields and GC repo rates for Treasury collateral to turn negative over year-end.  
Indeed, the implied forward rate for bills for the week spanning year-end is already at 
    around minus 15 basis points, as shown in the bottom right panel.  This is not an unusual degree of softness relative to other short-term interest rates; however, it is notable because, given the low absolute level of rates, this softness pushes the yield into negative territory. This consideration raises a policy question of whether the Federal Reserve should use its balance sheet to offset such a development.  We could do so by supplying 
more Treasury collateral to the market, either by a special TSLF operation over year-end or through reverse repurchase agreements.  As for now, we are inclined to think that mildly negative Treasury yields are not problematic and would not require such a policy response. However, any signs that the rates are going more deeply negative and are causing disruption to market functioning could change that assessment.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Questions for Brian? President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Brian, there has been an enormous amount of chatter and some articles written about the carry trade, and I wonder from a Desk perspective, being more market-oriented, and less from a theoretical standpoint, if you could give us your views on the arguments put forward by Roubini and others.  Is this a problem, or is it a non-issue? MR. SACK. There is a lot of talk about the carry trade, and I think when we talk about the carry trade we need to be careful to distinguish whether we are talking about a fundamental story that we would expect to take place or whether we are talking about something beyond that. The fundamental story would be that low financing rates in the United States should make it attractive to borrow and to go long other assets. And you should evaluate the return on those other assets relative to the return that investors could get on a risk-free asset, which is quite low.  To the degree that the carry trade reflects that activity, I think it is perfectly reasonable and desirable. The question is, Do we see so much activity that it goes beyond that, where the low financing rates are causing asset prices to go up too far because there is too much leverage and too much risk-taking? 
   That is what I tried to focus on, in the context of U.S. assets, in exhibit 1.  I think the only way to answer that question is to turn to the models and try to make an assessment of fair value.  And for U.S. assets, we do not see a problem at this point because, as I said, we think they are fairly priced.  I do think there are greater concerns regarding assets outside the United States, in particular emerging market assets.  We dont look at those in detail, so I dont have as detailed an answer, but we have certainly heard quite a bit of concern being expressed about the prices on those assets being pushed up too far.  So I think it is a concern, or it is a risk to be aware of, but I would think at this point it is directed toward emerging-market asset prices.   MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Yes. Im looking at exhibits 17 and 18, which show the effects of large-scale asset purchases. And we have some pretty substantial effects here, which I can see and I agree with. But there are no measures of uncertainty around these.  So I wonder if you could comment on how much confidence you would put in these estimates because they are probably very difficult to estimate.  Now, the one on the left maybe looks as though some 
statistical significance is there. MR. SACK. The short answer is that there is a lot of uncertainty about calibrating the effects.  Absolutely.  And the uncertainty in these two panels comes from different sources in some way.  In the one on the left, like any model of fair value, the results have only a certain degree of statistical significance and can depend on the type of model that you write down.  This model actually includes a supply variable directly, which it does find is statistically significant, 
and then we can use that to back out, in the context of the model, what it thinks the effects of the 
 LSAPs would be.  The point estimate is something around 50 basis points, but it has a confidence interval that certainly spans easily from 20 to 80 or so. The uncertainty on the right is a bit different, but equally important.  The advantage of the event-study exercise is to zoom in on the LSAP events, so that we can be sure we are isolating the effect of the LSAPs. Of course, the downside of event-studies is that they give you no perspective on whether those effects persist and what the dynamics are thereafter.  If you have an efficient-markets hypothesis, you might expect them to persist.  I mean, it would be odd, in the context of efficient markets, if they predictably reversed in a timely way.  We have some confidence that some of this effect persists, but I guess I wouldnt want to hang my hat on saying absolutely that this entire effect persists.  So that is the source of uncertainty there.  I take this 
evidence together to suggest that the LSAPs have worked.  There has been some effect, but it is very difficult to quantify, no doubt. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, in panel 19, you have plotted a possible path for the tapering down of the MBS purchases.  If that is the path that you indeed follow, do you have some, even intuitive, sense of a point along that path at which you would begin to feel relatively more confident that you werent going to see a significant effect on the markets from the tapering off of our purchases?  I know that is tied up with the degree to which this is a flow effect. MR. SACK. I think it is useful, regarding that question, just to relate what we hear from the market participants who come through our door and talk to us about this.  Almost everyone thinks that MBS spreads are too low and are too low because of Fed purchases.  There is disagreement about the size of those effects, but if you ask me to give you a range, I would say 
    that the range we hear is 25 to 100 basis points.  My own view is that it is going to be much closer to the lower end of that, but certainly that is hard to pin down. The logical next question is to ask, Well, if you think that, why arent you shorting this and trying to take advantage of that?  And the answer almost as uniformly is, We are going to, but we are just afraid to get into it yet, while the Fed is still so sizable. So it is a very strange situation from a market perspective, especially from those of us who think about the efficiency of markets.  Everyone is kind of waiting for this adjustment to take place and kind of waiting to jump in to try to take advantage of it.  There is just a sense that it is too early. My guess is that we are not talking about waiting until the end.  There will be some arbitrage that, if there is a flow effect, is going to bring it forward.  It would be a wild guess, but I would say that it wouldnt be surprising to see something start to develop within the next two months, as we get closer to that exit.  I think when people assess their risks, we havent heard anyone come and express the view that mortgages are cheap and that the spread is likely to go down. So that kind of leaves you with this one-sided opportunity that I think cant persist for that long. MR. TARULLO. Okay. Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? Okay.  Seeing none, we have three staff presentations on our liquidity programs and reserve-management tools, and I will turn to Bill Nelson to lead off. MR. NELSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will briefly update the Committee on the TAF, primary credit, and the TALF.  The staff is not seeking views at this time, but we would be happy to answer the Committees questions.Credit extended under the term auction facility peaked near $500 billion in March and has declined steadily since. Over the intermeeting period, TAF credit declined further to just under $140 billion.  Of that amount, about three-quarters is extended to branches and agencies of foreign banks.  On September 24, the Board announced a 
       phase-down schedule for TAF amounts through January, and it also indicated that auctions of credit with maturities longer than 28 days would be phased out.  In yesterdays auction of 70-day TAF funds, the amount auctioned was cut to $25 billion, half the October amount.  Only $13.2 billion was requested even though $43 billion is maturing.  By January 11, 2010, only $75 billion of 28-day credit will be offered. We do not expect to ask the Board to make any decision about the TAF in the near term.  Later this year or perhaps early next year, the Board will be asked to consider whether to further reduce the amount provided in TAF auctions, perhaps to zero. Reducing TAF auction amounts to zero in the intermediate term would be consistent with the ongoing gradual normalization of Federal Reserve liquidity operations, would ensure that no bank currently using the facility remained reliant on TAF funding, and would help reduce reserve balances during a period in which the FOMC might be tightening policy.  If auction amounts were reduced to zero, the staff would work to preserve operational readiness by periodically conducting simulated 
auctions. Id emphasize that reducing TAF credit to zero for a period would not 
imply that TAF credit would necessarily be zero in the future steady state. The options that policymakers might consider for a permanent TAF currently seem likely to include using TAF only as a tool for contingencies with no credit outstanding in normal times or conducting monthly auctions of relatively small amounts of credit to preserve readiness. Whether to have a permanent TAF and, if so, in what form is an 
issue we expect to raise once the financial crisis has fully subsided. Turning to primary credit, prior to the financial crisis, the primary credit rate had been consistently set at a level 100 basis points over the target federal funds rate, and the maximum available term of primary credit was overnight except for the smallest institutions, which could borrow for up to one month.  Over the past two years, the Federal Reserve narrowed the primary credit rate spread to 25 basis points and lengthened the maximum maturity to 90 days.  The total amount of primary credit outstanding peaked near $115 billion in October 2008.  It has since fallen to $23 billion, of which more than 90 percent is to branches and agencies of foreign banks and two-thirds is extended to a single foreign bank that is prohibited from term borrowing and is rolling overnight credit. About $4.5 billion in primary credit had an initial maturity greater than 28 days, and nearly all of that is to another foreign bank. Later this week, the Board will be asked to consider whether the maximum maturity on primary credit loans should be reduced to 28 days in January 2010.  In this way, the terms on primary credit would not be tightened until after year-end, but then the maximum maturity of primary credit would be aligned with the maturity of 
TAF loans. The Board and Reserve Banks could evaluate early next year the appropriate time to adjust the spread of the primary credit rate over the target rate and possibly to reduce further the maximum maturity on primary credit loans. If Reserve 
Bank Presidents have comments on the proposal to reduce the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 28 days, please convey them directly to the Board staff or to a member of the Board in the next few days. 
     Lastly, I will provide a brief update on the TALF.  On October 5, the Board announced two changes to the procedures for evaluating asset-backed securities pledged to the TALF. First, the Board requested public comment on a rule that would establish criteria for determining the credit rating agencies whose ratings on ABS would be accepted at the facility. The proposed criteria will most likely result in ratings from one additional agency being accepted starting with the January subscription. Second, starting with the November subscription, which takes place 
today, the New York Fed is conducting a formal risk assessment of all ABS pledged 
to the facility. The new risk-assessment process has gone smoothly, and eight ABS with a total value of about $6 billion will be issued in conjunction with the November subscription. In recent months, spreads on most triple-A auto and credit card ABS have fallen well below the 100 basis point TALF spread, and ABS are increasingly being funded by non-TALF sources. Whereas in May through August, TALF lending equaled about two-thirds of ABS issuance, in September it fell to one-third and in October to one-quarter. The proportion appears likely to fall further in November, with less than $1 billion in TALF loans for ABS expected today.  Investors have now repaid over 20 percent of TALF loans backed by ABS, contributing to a 10 percent decline in outstanding TALF credit over the intermeeting period. Conditions in the market for commercial mortgage-backed securities are more mixed.  Spreads on CMBS in secondary markets have narrowed significantly but are still somewhat elevated, and TALF lending to finance purchases of legacy CMBS continues each month at fairly low levels.  The new-issue CMBS market remains closed, but it now appears likely that a security, which will be eligible for TALF financing, will be brought to market later this month.  Nathan will now continue the staff presentation. MR. SHEETS. With the Federal Reserves temporary liquidity swap lines expected to expire on February 1, the staff has assessed the case for putting in place a set of standing swap lines. Based on this examination, and as discussed in our background memo, we recommend that the Committee establish standing dollar-
liquidity and foreign-currency-liquidity swap lines with the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank.  Standing dollar-liquidity lines would allow these central banks to access dollars, while foreign-currency lines would give the Federal Reserve the capacity to provide euros, yen, sterling, and Swiss francs to U.S. institutions.  These lines would be precautionary in 
nature and would be designed to serve as a backstop during times of stress.  We would expect that during normal times the lines would not be used.   We propose that the limits on the new dollar lines be much smaller than those for the temporary lines$30 billion each for the ECB and the BOJ and $15 billion each for the BOE and SNB. This significant reduction in the size of the swap lines and in the number of counterparties (from fourteen central banks to four) would seem to provide a reasonable balance between the broad thrust of the Committees exit 
    strategies and the potential utility of these lines in periods of stress.  For the standing foreign-currency lines, we propose that the sizes be comparable to those for the dollar lines, which would also represent a significant downsizing. As envisioned, the lines would include sufficient governance features to ensure that any use of swap line resources was consistent with the objectives and intentions of the FOMC. For example, the Federal Reserve could deny drawings to fund intervention in foreign exchange markets.  Establishment of the swap lines would require an initial vote of the FOMC, with each line requiring re-authorization by the FOMC on an annual basis.  Initial disbursements under the lines could occur either under the supervision of the Foreign Currency Subcommittee or require an additional vote of the full Committee.   We see the case for a small set of standing lines as quite convincing.  First, through the rigors of the crisis, the swap lines have proven useful in combating financial stresses.  Maintaining a small set of standing swap lines is the best way to ensure that the lines are fully operational when they are needed.  The routine maintenance of standing facilities requires that technical expertise and operational apparatusboth at the Federal Reserve and at foreign central banksbe ready to activate at short notice. In addition, coordinating policy decisions with foreign central banks has the potential to be complicated and time consuming, so its preferable to have as many as possible of these decisions negotiated in advance.  Thus we see the establishment of standing lines as being superior to just having documentation on the shelf.  Second, even if the lines are never activated, they should help foster confidence in the robustness of the international financial system and thus contribute positively to market functioning.  Third, the swap lines have been a powerful symbol of central bank cooperation. The decision to create standing lines would be seen as a signal that central banks intend to continue to work closely together. Fourth, the crisis has dramatized the remarkable extent to which financial markets have become globally integrated. The dollar swap lines expand the Federal Reserves capacity to address funding pressures abroad and thus help to prevent those pressures from spilling over to domestic markets.  Finally, the swap lines foster an expectation that home central banks will be called on to make judgments about the financial health of their domestic institutions during times of stress.  This should enhance central banks incentives to keep careful tabs on the activities of their large global institutions. The rationale for establishing dollar swap lines with the ECB, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank is compelling, given the 
large dollar funding markets and globally active financial institutions in their economies.  And while we cannot perfectly foresee where or when U.S. institutions 
might face foreign-currency funding pressures, extending the Federal Reserves capacity to act as a lender of last resort in euros, yen, sterling, and Swiss francs strikes us as prudent insurance against a range of potential adverse scenarios.   The decision to establish standing swap lines with only these four central banks will no doubt disappoint some of our other existing central bank counterparties.  But 
            our recent experience indicates that maintaining a larger network of swap lines exposes the Federal Reserve to recurring boundary problems.  Over the past year, many foreign central banks have petitioned the Federal Reserve to establish temporary swap lines with them.  Given that we value our relationships with these central banks, turning down such requests has at times put us in a difficult position.  Our proposal sets a very high bar for the establishment of standing swap lines, which should minimize such difficulties in the future. We propose that these lines be structured broadlyas the temporary lines have beenwith short-maturity draws and safeguards to ensure that the credit risk to the Federal Reserve is nil. In addition, the pricing structure for the swap lines would be negotiated with an eye toward mitigating moral hazard by providing funds to 
institutions at a rate that is attractive during times of stress but not attractive during normal times.  Notably, the pricing of the temporary dollar lines appears to have satisfied this objective: Total outstandings under these lines surged to over $580 billion in December 2008 as the crisis intensified but have since dropped to less 
than $35 billion as conditions have improved.  We expect that the high bar for central bank counterparties and the smaller sizes of the lines will also limit the extent of moral hazard.  Of course, if stresses emerge, additional swap lines could be put in place and the size of the lines could be scaled up, but there is no guarantee that the Federal Reserve and other central banks would actually choose to do so in any 
particular case. The staff proposes that the standing lines become effective on the day that the temporary lines expire, thus providing a seamless transition between the two types of lines. Given the continued healing in funding markets, our working assumption is that the temporary swap lines will expire on February 1 as scheduled. If the Committee supports moving forward with standing swap lines, the staff would immediately begin to negotiate the details of these arrangements with the foreign central banks. The staff would then ask the Committee to vote on a formal 
resolution at either the December or the January meeting, depending on the pace of 
those negotiations and other developments.  We anticipate that the creation of the standing swap lines would be publicly announced shortly following the meeting in which the resolution was approved. We would, of course, keep the Committee apprised of developments influencing this timetable as they evolve. Finally, I turn to a brief discussion of our standing swap lines under the North American Framework Agreement (NAFA).  These lines are relatively small, sized at $3 billion for Mexico and $2 billion for Canada.  The staff sees two broad approaches for dealing with these lines.  The first is simply to leave them in place in their current 
form.  Given their relatively small size, these lines are largely vestigial, so the benefits and costs of maintaining them as is are both minimal.   Another option would be to modernize these lineschanging their structure and legal documentation to match more closely those of our other standing lines.  Notably, the NAFA lines were established with the explicit purpose of promoting 
       orderly conditions in foreign exchange markets, and they have a relatively rigid pricing structure. We would suggest refocusing the lines more directly on countering dollar funding pressures. This could be done by making their pricing more flexible, consistent with the broad principles discussed above, and by increasing the sizes of the lines to, say, $8 billion or $10 billion.   The following points argue for modernization:  First, the extent of North American integration provides a special justification for these lines and a rationale for treating Canada and Mexico differently from other countries.  Second, our sense is 
that officials in these countries would welcome this approach, and not enhancing the lines might strain our relationships with them.  Third, it seems more orderly and 
transparent to have all our linesboth with the four foreign central banks and with our NAFA counterpartiesstructured in a broadly similar way.  Fourth, Mexico already has an arrangement under the IMFs flexible credit lines, so the swap line would not be substituting for a relationship with the Fund. However, we also note some reservations.  First, financial institutions in Canada and Mexico are not globally active in the same sense as institutions in the economies of our other four counterparties.  Second, seeing that Mexico has a swap line, other emerging market economies might request lines as well.  Our substantial integration with Mexico should provide persuasive responses to these requests, but it might be better not to open this door at all.  Third, the quality of Mexicos economic and financial policies and the stability of its underlying institutions are not yet comparable 
to those of our four other counterparties or to Canadas.  On balance, the staff leans toward a recommendation to modernize the NAFA swap lines, but this is admittedly a 
close call. We envision that any enhancements to the NAFA lines would be implemented on the same timetable as that for the other standing swap lines.  Chris 
Burke will now continue our presentation. MR. BURKE. Thank you, Nathan. Jim Clouse and I will now update the Committee on staff work on reserve collateral accounts, reserve repurchase agreements, and term deposits.  I will start with reserve collateral accounts. Under a reserve collateral account, or RCA, a pair of institutionsa purchaser of funds, generally a depository institution, and a seller of funds, typically a GSE would set up a special-purpose account at the Federal Reserve.  The seller would have control of the movement of funds into and out of the account.  The buyer would be required to hold the funds in the account, and those funds would both collateralize the 
transaction and earn interest on excess reserves.  The RCA would eliminate the credit risk that would have been present in a fed funds sale transaction, allowing lenders such as GSEs to deal with a greater number of counterparties and theoretically earn a higher interest rate. With line limits becoming less of a constraint on GSEs funds sales, the linkage between the interest rate on reserves and shorter-term rates should be tightened. Since the last FOMC meeting, we have discussed RCAs in detail with two GSEs, several depository institutions, and the FDIC.  Extrapolating from the feedback from 
        Freddie Mac and the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco, there may be broad interest from GSEs in lending funds using these accounts.  The ability to mitigate counterparty risk and engage a wider range of counterparties to attain higher interest rates is understandably attractive to them.  On the other hand, the feedback from the depository institutions was mixed:  Some were interested in creating RCAs, some 
were indifferent, and some were not in favor of the accounts.  Based on their collective comments, the staff believes that it is possible that some banks would seek to purchase funds using these accounts, primarily those banks that currently have higher-than-average equity-to-asset ratios and that do not now borrow from the GSEs.  The estimated range of interest rates that would likely be negotiated for sales into RCAs varied from a high of 5 basis points below the interest rate on excess reserves to a low of 18 basis points below the IOER rate, though one large money center bank expressed the view that it would not participate for a spread of less than 50 basis points. One significant outstanding issue with RCAs is how the FDIC would treat funds in an RCA in the event of a borrowers insolvency.  In order for RCAs to be viable, sellers require clear guidance about the disposition of funds in an RCA in this situation. Staff members at the FDIC understand that point but have stated that further review is necessary. We expect to hear back from the FDIC this week. At this point, while it is likely that RCAs could provide some benefits, the effectiveness of this instrument in tightening our control of short-term interest rates is difficult to forecast.  Moreover, fully developing this instrument would divert staff members from critical work on term deposits and reverse repos.  Because the FOMC has placed a strong emphasis on the development of those two tools, the staff recommends that efforts on RCAs be put on hold until the other tools are closer to fruition. Turning to reverse repos, given the successful testing of triparty reverse repos with the primary dealers and clearing banks that has taken place over recent weeks, the Desk now has the capability to settle reverse repurchase agreements in the triparty system with primary dealers using SOMA Treasury and agency debt securities as 
collateral.  That said, the Desk recommends that this tool be used in a series of small, real-value operations to have full confidence that all operational details have been addressed before reverse repos are deployed in size.  The reason is that the tests run to date, while effective, do not allow for complete end-to-end testing.  One possibility would be for the Desk to conduct a $360 million operation the week of November 16, and a series of operations the week of November 30 that would not exceed $1.4 billion in aggregate at any one time.  It would be very important to communicate to market participants that these small-scale operations are merely an aspect of the ongoing testing and do not signal that a firming of monetary policy is imminent.  Such communication could come from the Desk rather than the FOMC to sharpen this distinction. In particular, the Desk could announce the small-scale operations in the form of an operating statement, similar to the one issued on October 19. 
     The work just described applies only to reverse repos with primary dealers using Treasury and agency debt securities as collateral.  Work continues on establishing the triparty reverse repo capability using agency MBS securities, as that has several complicating dimensions to it.  We are still some weeks away from finalizing a plan with the clearing banks, our MBS custodian, and our investment manager, and it may then take some months to implement the plan.  A second set of real-value tests may prove useful in early 2010, when the capability to reverse out agency MBS securities is expected to become available. A broader issue regarding reverse repurchase agreements is determining the appropriate set of counterparties for the Desk.  The primary dealers tend to be net borrowers of funds rather than net providers, which makes them unnatural 
counterparties for reverse repos. Moreover, there is currently no means for dealers to borrow collateral from the Fed and then reverse out that collateral to cash providers without grossing up their balance sheets and affecting their leverage ratios.  As a consequence, the current capacity of the primary dealer community to enter into reverse repos with the Fed is limited.  Based on a Desk survey of all the primary 
dealers and a survey conducted by the Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG), system capacity appears to be in the range of $100 billion to $250 billion. The staff continues to explore options to expand reverse repo capacity, either by enabling the dealers to participate to a greater extent or by expanding our counterparties. Dealer capacity might be expanded in a number of ways, including the use of a netting facility such as the Fixed Income Clearing Corporations general collateral finance repo facility, which would allow the dealers to net their reverse repos with the Fed with their matching repos with the cash investors and thus keep these transactions off their balance sheets.  It is too soon to tell if any of these approaches will bear fruit.  In terms of providing regulatory relief for balance sheet concerns, the news is not encouraging:  Dealers have identified a host of constraints, meaning that there is no single solution. For example, seven dealers have bank holding company tier-1 leverage ratio concerns; nine dealers have home-country constraints (including France, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Japan); and most dealers noted concerns regarding how credit rating agencies and market analysts would perceive an increase in balance sheet assets and leverage.  Although solutions to these constraints may exist, many agencies, both foreign and domestic, 
would have to coordinate responses. As a result, this avenue does not appear to offer much hope of relief in the short term. While we continue to pursue primary dealer capacity enhancements, we have also begun to explore issues surrounding expanding reverse repo counterparties beyond the primary dealers.  We have performed an initial survey of the major cash providers, the largest of which include the money market mutual funds, securities lenders and custodians, banks, government-sponsored entities, and foreign central banks. Several of these types of firms have characteristics that make them appealing counterparties. The main issue, however, may be related to the number of Desk 
counterparties and the logistics of putting a system in place in a timely manner. 
           For practical reasons, the Desk prefers to set up a system in which it interacts with a limited set of large firms.  This would allow us to expand capacity significantly and relatively quickly. For example, based on our very preliminary exploration, we can identify two dozen firms spanning the categories listed above that currently lend more than $1 trillion in funds on a short-term basis, with a sizable portion of that taking place in repo markets.  It would be feasible to set up fairly quickly the systems and arrangements needed to transact with those firms, giving us all the capacity we need. If the Desk must instead provide an opportunity for small firms to participate in these operations, the logistics of counterparty vetting and trading would likely become overwhelming, as the Federal Reserve has neither the systems nor the manpower to reach out to hundreds or thousands of potential cash investors.  Thus, before continuing work on the subject, the Desk would like to solicit guidance from the Committee on the approach to expanding counterparties.  With such guidance, we will be able to continue to explore potential counterparties with a greater degree of specificity. Ill now turn it over to Jim to discuss term deposits. MR. CLOUSE. Thanks Chris. I will be discussing progress on the term deposit facility, or TDF, under which the Federal Reserve would have the capability to offer 
term deposits to depository institutions as a means of reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system. Work on the TDF has been proceeding along three 
important dimensionsfurther developing systems and preparing for implementation; drafting key documents, including a Federal Register notice and a legal agreement for term deposits; and evaluating alternative designs for the TDF.  Ill briefly summarize progress in each of these three areas in turn and conclude with a discussion of next steps. The implementation workgroupwhich includes Reserve Bank representatives from various System communities including legal, reserves, accounting, credit-risk, and customer supporthas been overseeing the steps necessary to position the 
System to implement the TDF in the first quarter of next year.  Last weekend, the 
automation development teamafter months of hard workdeployed a web-based 
application that allows depositories to submit bids or subscription orders for term deposits via a secure Internet connection.  The application supports both posted rate offerings and auction offerings.  In coming months, the implementation team will be coordinating work across the System on the remaining steps necessary to implement a term deposit facility, such as formulating procedures for issuing electronic credentials to access the TDF and developing a communications plan.  The staff has also made substantial progress in developing two key documents that will be necessary before a term deposit facility can be implemented.  A system legal group has produced a draft agreement for term deposits that would be signed by participating institutions. In addition, the staff has developed a draft Federal Register notice that provides background on the proposed TDF and seeks comment from the 
     public on a number of key design features.  The Federal Register notice could be published this month if desired. The design workgroup has developed some basic structures for a term deposit facility.  The core design issues involve the type of deposit to be offeredfixed rate versus floating rateand the mechanism by which deposits would be offeredthrough an auction or simply by posting a rate or rates.  Beyond these key design parameters, there are a number of related technical questions, such as the appropriate maturities of term of deposits; whether to allow an early withdrawal option and, if so, at what penalty; and whether deposits can be pledged as collateral at the discount window. At present, the staffs sense is that term deposits would have relatively short maturities, likely ranging between two weeks and three months.  Our current thinking is that early withdrawal would not be allowed, given that the objective of a TDF is to drain reserves. On the other hand, it seems appropriate that banks should be able pledge term deposits as collateral at the window, especially if early withdrawal is not allowed, and the staff is working to ensure that such pledging can be done in an automated fashion.  The proposed Federal Register notice would seek public comment on all of these basic design questions. The staff anticipates that it will propose going out for public comment on the termdeposit facility with a 30-day comment period.  The results from the public comments would then inform decisions about the final structure for a term deposit facility.  On a parallel track, the implementation group will be coordinating work with Reserve Banks and various System groups to be in position to implement any of several potentially desirable structures for the TDF in the first quarter of next year. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We are open for questions from the Committee.  Please hold your comments and input just for a few more minutes, and we will have a chance for that as well.  But any questions for the staff?  President Lacker.  MR. LACKER. I was going to ask Mr. Sheets about the rough magnitude of the dollar reserves held by the four central banks that you are proposing we establish swap lines with. MR. SHEETS. We dont have a precise number, given some reporting issues for the euro system, which would include all of the NCBs plus the ECB, but those dollar reserves are somewhere on the order of about $150 billion to $160 billion.  For the BOJ, its a bit over $800 billion. They were very, very substantial holders of dollar reserves.  For the Bank of 
   England, its roughly on the order of $15 billion, and for the Swiss National Bank its around $23 billion. MR. LACKER. Okay. Is a lot of that held with CBIAS in New York, or do they have their own arrangements for buying assets? MR. SHEETS. Im not quite sure.   MS. MOSSER. Most central banks have accounts with us.  Very few central banks hold all of their reservesfor very few central banks, we are the custodian for all of their reserves.  They almost all have additional custody relationships in addition to CBIAS. MR. LACKER. So, operationally, how would a foreign central bank selling dollar reserves in order to lend dollars to one of their banks compare with the operational requirements of obtaining dollars through one of these swap lines and lending them on? For operational convenience, how would those two compare? MR. SHEETS. It seems to me that the major difference is that, in the one case, they would have to sell off their holdings of government securities, which if you are thinking that this might occur during a period of stress could be unsettling to the government securities market.  What these swap lines do is allow these foreign central banks to have access to dollar liquidity without actually asking them to liquefy their reserves. MR. LACKER. And these are dollar reserves.  So if they are selling off government assets, these are probably Treasuries? MR. SHEETS. These are probably Treasuries.  Thats what I was referring to.  It may be that during a period of stress you dont want them to be selling off their Treasuries.  That could be disruptive to the market. MR. LACKER. Dont Treasury security prices usually go up during times of stress? 
    MR. SHEETS. That has been our experience over the last crisis, absolutely.  But do you want to bet that in every state of nature thats the way its going to be? You know, there are risks, and we dont know which way foreign preferences will go toward Treasuries at some future time. MR. LACKER. We heard earlier that a huge amount of the primary credit facility borrowers are foreign banks. Does the borrowing through these swap lines occur by banks that dont have access to our primary credit facility? MR. SHEETS. My understanding is that its some of both. MR. LACKER. So there are some institutions that could borrow from us directly, and they borrow either instead or also through MR. SHEETS. Through the swap lines. Given the pricing structure of the swap lines, getting funds through the swap lines has been relatively expensive.  So if they have had a choice, 
they havent gone to the swap lines. MR. LACKER. So one of these banks that is borrowing directly from us could lend it on to one of these others banks, couldnt they? MR. SHEETS. Through the interbank market? MR. LACKER. Okay. 
MR. SHEETS. I would assume so. 
MS. MOSSER. I dont believe that, certainly during the crisis, that was actually what happened in practice. What I think is particularly true of European institutions is that they were borrowing in the United States and then moving the cash to their homes.  The U.S. subsidiary was sending it basically to the parent, and they were not lending it on to other institutions in Europe. They were using it in their own parent institutions.   
  MR. LACKER. I see. One final question. When you refer to funding pressures, you are not talking about the overall supply and demand of reserves.  You are talking about individual institutions that have to pay up in the market? MR. SHEETS. Thats right. Their capacity to be able to go into the market and access reserves. Obviously, there is a price component to that.  But as we saw through the last crisis, as the interbank market came under stress, the volume of transactions also dried up.  So I think that, in addition to a price component, there was a rationing going on in the market as well. MR. LACKER. But I guess my point was that this doesnt do anything for the overall supply of reserves in the market that discount window lending or open market operations wouldnt do. It just facilitates channeling those reserves to particular institutions that would otherwise face high counterparty credit-risk premiums. MR. SHEETS. Right. And in particular, maybe some institutions that may not have access to our domestic facilities.  Nevertheless, as you recall early on in the crisis, these guys were coming into the money markets in New York and creating volatility through their demands for dollar funding. In particular, early in the day they were demanding huge quantities of liquidity and driving up the rate, and then the rate would crash at the end of the day.  But it was making Vice Chairman Dudleys job extremely difficult.  So there are important spillover effects for us, and we point to this as one of the major reasons that it is important to maintain the capacity to provide dollar liquidity to foreign markets. MR. SACK. Another dimension, from the perspective of policymakers, is that, even though some firms can substitute between getting dollar funding here through our facilities and getting it abroad, by providing a dollar swap and allowing the foreign central bank to provide the dollar liquidity, they rather than the Fed are bearing the credit risk of the facility. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is what I was going to say.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. 
MS. MOSSER. One final commentI also think about the realities of collateral.  The fact is that large global financial institutions have collateral at almost all the large central banks.  Moving that collateral on short notice, particularly in the midst of a crisis, from one central bank to another in order to make sure that you have collateral and you can borrow in the right currency is very time-consuming.  It does not happen quickly.  There is work afoot to make that movement of collateral around the world smoother, but it isnt there yet.  And the swap arrangements, like the comparison of moving collateral around, basically put the counterparty 
risk, as Brian noted, frankly, where it belongs, and also allowed the collateral to be used at the central bank that is actually bearing the counterparty risk and not moved around and needing to be reevaluated by another central bank. MR. LACKER. Just one more little follow-up:  Do we know whether the difference between rates paid last fall in the early part of the day by foreign banks and rates paid after they ceased participating in the market, which were lower, reflected market segmentation across the day or higher credit-risk premiums if they were paid?   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, do you want to answer that? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I think our feeling at the time, President Lacker, was that it was due to the fact that there was a structural dollar shortage in Europe.  So there was a strong time-of-day effect.  It wasnt just a counterparty-risk issue. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, you were next. 
    MR. LOCKHART. This is not on this particular question, but tois it Chris Burke? Did I hear that correctly? MR. BURKE. Yes. MR. LOCKHART. Help me with connecting the dots at a high level here.  I took your overall discussion of the reverse repo market to be sort of discouraging on netnear term at leastthat we have obstacles, various technical challenges that are building up, and that it is far from certain that this is going to be a large-capacity drainer of excess reserves.  Then I look at the markets view of this question in exhibit 26, and it appears that they are ranking the reverse repos as the largest possible drainer of reserves.  Are we building here to a disconnect between the reality of this tool and what the market thinks this tool can do and, therefore, a schism between public views of our ability to drain and what we can really accomplish? MR. BURKE. I think it is a sense of timing.  We have collateral.  We have the ability to reverse out our Treasury and agency collateral today.  Even without agency MBS, we could have a program of $800 billion from a collateral perspective.  The primary dealers, though, as noted, are limited to something maybe more in the $200 billion range.  But that does mean that today we have $200 billion in capacity, and I think its going to depend on the Committees answer to the counterparty discussion. If we can deal with a small number of large firms, in very short order I think we can bring the capacity of this tool to at least match the level of collateral that we have to reverse out. MR. LOCKHART. If we gave you an answer today, how long do you think it would take you to be in a position to do a large-scale program that approaches that collateral level of $800 billion? 
   MR. BURKE. A very preliminary guess might be somewhere in the year-end time frame.  We have the legal infrastructure in place.  We have the authority to deal with the counterparties. So its a question of logistically arrangingdoing the vetting of the individual counterparties I think would be the biggest chunk of work there.  We can already identify a super-large, well-known money fund as having a lot of cash to invest.  They already deal with triparty. We can already work in triparty.  We have the authority to deal with that firm, so it is getting in and doing the credit review, the regulatory review, and saying, Okay. We are good to go. And then we can be investing or taking money from them in reverse repo transactions.  So I think in fairly short order. If we have to cast a wider net for counterparties, though, its going to be a very different ballgame.   MR. LOCKHART. This may not be a question for Chris, but is this coming to a question soon? MR. BURKE. Well, I think the intent in my presentation, at least at my level, was to put the question on the table.  I am not sure of the formalities. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will make a list of what input is desired, and then we will ask everyone. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I just had a follow-up to the answer that Nathan gave on the intraday volatility that you referred to in terms of reserves.  To what degree was that also the creation of our own operating proceduresthat we were going into the market only once a day and we were reluctant to be players on a continuous basis?  Could we have solved some of that problem by our own operating procedures and being in the market more continuously? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Part of the problem is that we never have had knowledge of how much reserves we actually did need to add during the day because we dont have a real 
       sense of whether the banking system has the appropriate amount of reserves. So you could respond multiple times during the day but end up adding way too many reserves or adding MR. PLOSSER. Is that because we were targeting quantities rather than prices?  Once again, could we have been closer had we been more frequent? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There was also an operational issuelate in the day, the market gets much thinner.  So there is also a timing issue in that, the later you go in the day, the lessyou know, the money market business is a morning business.  But, yes, you could have conceivably tried to do more. MR. PLOSSER.  I was just reacting to your saying that was one of the major reasons we want to have this.  In some ways, we could have done some things on our own to help mitigate some of that, I guess. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think our feeling at the time was that we were not confident that multiple interventions during the day would have actually helped us hit the target better. MR. LACKER. A two-hander? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker? MR. LACKER.  These observations are from pre-IOER.  The operation he is talking about is soaking up reserves late in the day, which is exactly what the interest rate on reserves has done.  It is not clear that this would be a big problem. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. MR. FISHER.  On the TALF, as we go through more auctions, more subscriptions, is there any incidence of refinancing previous TALF loans?  And if so, how much and what does it tell us? 
         MR. NELSON. We do extend some TALF loans for seasoned ABS.  I guess its conceivable that those ABS had previously been borrowed against and then resold into the market or they were issued as TALF-eligible and not taken up in the first round.  However, off the top of my head, I do not know the amount that is being extended against seasoned ABS. MR. FISHER.  Do you think it is significant?  Can we find out? MR. NELSON.  Certainly. Yes, Ill get that to you. MR. FISHER.  It may just be that rates are increasingly attractive.  I dont know, but I would be curious as to how much recycling is taking place. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chair. MR. KOHN. I thought the trend was that people were actually paying back the TALF loans. MR. FISHER.  No, thats true in the aggregate.  So Im just asking the question. MR. KOHN. Rather than refinancing them, theyre actually paying them back and doing better in the market than they can do at the Federal Reserve. MR. FISHER.  Thats true in the aggregate. 
MR. NELSON.  Theyre not refinancing their loans, but theyre paying them back.  That collateral is freeing up and conceivably could come back into the facility, which is what I thought you were asking. MR. FISHER.  Right.   
MR. NELSON. But the overall amount of lending is just dropping very rapidly.  This month its going to be between $600 million and $1 billion, I think.  So there just is not a lot of scope for very much activity along those lines, given how quickly activity under the facility has 
quieted down. 
               MR. FISHER.  Thanks. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a question about swap lines.  I like the memo, and I like the approach.  The policy of discontinuing the swap lines with certain central banksIm not quite sure where that leaves us because it seems as though now that, when we get into another crisis, the presumption would be that we would reestablish those lines with those banks since we did so this time around.  So Im not quite sure how to place your description of what we are doing here in that context because I think that there would certainly be overwhelming pressure 
in another crisis of this magnitude to reestablish those swap lines.  Then you would have the difficulty of having to, as you say, renegotiate and set up the details, as you did this time.  So Im wondering what you think about that as opposed to the idea that we are pulling back and were maybe implicitly saying that we may not reestablish with, say, South Korea or other countries like that in the future.  Whats your thinking on that? MR. SHEETS.  A couple of thoughts.  Your general point is well taken.  On the first point in terms of the pulling back, the scaling, and so on and so forth, our view is that we need to have a certain small number of swap lines in order to have the operational capacity to understand how they work, to have thought through all of the legal issues, and also to have a good sense from the Committee and from other central banks as to what the appropriate policy objectives of these things are. But from that relatively small set, if conditions require, its usually fairly easy to scale it out.  So Im not worried about if we only have four and then the world blows up and we want to have fourteen again whether it is going to be harder to go from four to fourteen.  No. I would be worried about going from zero to four, however.  Ten years from now, the folks in New York who did all the work may be onto other things or other positions, and just as was the case in this last 
               episode, we had to run around and pretty much figure these things out from scratch. I actually think that Trish has a few purple hearts that she earned in that process.  Now, the flip side of this is that we gave them a swap line once, and if things get bad, were going to give them a swap line again.  I think that is a very reasonable presumption if a crisis erupts in a year or two years.  But if the next crisis is eight or ten years out, there is a lot of water under the bridge. The world looks a lot different, and its not clear to me that there is the same presumption.  Now, the Committee at that point may want to look at it and come to the conclusion that, yes, we want to give Korea another swap line, but I do not think there would be as strong a presumption as if they actually had a swap line with us. So I do think there is some meaning in where we draw this set of counterparties.  As I mentioned in my remarksbut it is an important pointit is also very helpful to us in managing our relationships with foreign central banks from here until the time of the next crisis.  on Yes. MR. NELSON. Could I add another piece of information for President Fisher?  The repayment of TALF loans has been concentrated in the plain-vanilla, short-maturity ABS where secondary market spreads have come down the most:  autos; credit cards; equipment ABS to a lesser extent. Because those spreads are now well below the TALF loan rateand for example, in the current subscription that is going on today, there was no request at all for TALF loans against the auto ABS that were issuedit strikes me as pretty unlikely that a very large part of the TALF lending thats going on now is going to finance ABS that have already been paid back.  Those would have appreciated in price, and their spreads would now be too narrow to be attractive to finance under the TALF. MR. FISHER.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Lacker. 
    MR. LACKER. Yes, about the liquidity swap lines that would enable us to lend foreign currency to our institutions and some other countries.  My recollection is that those were motivatedI wont say primarily, but largelyby one large institution.  At the time it seemed correct me if Im wrong, if the reasoning goes in a different waypreferable to the long and arduous task of encouraging through supervisory means that the institution find other foreign currency liquidity sources on which it could rely and reduce the extent of maturity transformation that it conducted in foreign currencies.  So I was wondering if progress has been made on supervisory efforts to encourage that institution to reduce its vulnerability to maturity transformation in other currencies. MR. SHEETS. I dont have specific information about that institution. The motivation for this proposal, however, is much broader and more generic than a single institution.  Our expectation is that these lines wouldnt be used anytime soon.  We do not have a single institution in mind.  But we do have a generic class of problems in mind in which you have a U.S. institution that is operating abroad that for some reason has either difficulty in mobilizing its collateral to use at the foreign central banks window or a real possibility that the foreign central bank is unwilling to lend to an institution with legitimate collateral.  We have had conversations with various central banks one in particularwhen they have said that, under certain circumstances, they wouldnt be willing to lend to our institutions.  So these are very precautionary in nature, but I think that they respond to a real class of problems that it makes sense for us to take out some insurance against. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? Trish. MS. MOSSER.  May I make one more comment to President Lacker?  Although not mentioned specifically in the memo, it is probably worth remembering that the first time that liquidity swaps were used was on September 12 and September 13, 2001.  So there are other 
           circumstances for having these kinds of facilities in place, and in the case of the reverse lines particularly, should there be some sort of catastrophic event in another large financial center where our ability to basically do broad distribution of foreign currency, not just to specific institutions, might be useful.  We didnt really discuss that here, but we know that it has been done at least once the other way. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. The next item on the agenda is billed as an opportunity for interaction[laughter] a way of saying that we dont necessarily want to have a go-round.  We do have two subsequent go-rounds.  Everyone will have a chance to give their views.  However, this is an opportunity both to interact with each other and to give comments and feedback to the staff on the issues that theyve raised.  So that people know what you would like to hear, let me just go through that quickly.  As I understand it, there are no formal actions proposed for today; is that right? MR. SHEETS.  Thats right. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. But, Mr. Burke, you would like to hear some views on the counterparty issue. Anything else that you would like to hear from the Committee? MR. BURKE.  Actually we want to affirm, if we can, the plan to put RCAs on hold until we get the reverse repos and term deposits more fully squared away.  We would like approval to do some small, real-value test operations of the reverse repos and, if we are going to do that, maybe the ability to issue another operating statement similar to the one on October 19. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That would be, I think, implied. MR. BURKE. But the last one, as you mentioned, is on counterparties, whether we can create a system by which we can select a small number of large firms to transact with or whether we need to cast a wide net and allow small firms to participate. 
       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Mr. Clouse.  Anything from you? MR. CLOUSE. The staff is proposing a Federal Register notice, potentially this month for design input on the term deposits.  It would be helpful to hear whether thats a desirable thing or not. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill, anything? MR. NELSON. The only near-term decision that were asking of the Board in the next few days is on the maximum maturity of the primary credit rate.  But if the Presidents have views on that issue, if they could convey that directly to a staff member or to a Governor over the coming days outside this meeting, that would be best.  The other issues are ones for coming months or early next year, and I suppose that views expressed on those as well would be valuable now.  Those have to do with, in the intermediate term, the scaling-back of the TAF to possibly zero in the first half of next year and also the eventual adjustment to the return to normalization of the terms of primary credit.  Again, both of those things are decisions that would be made next year. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, and, Nathan, you want comments on the swap proposal. MR. SHEETS. Right.  Particularly the counterparties, the size, and how to handle the North American swaps with Mexico and Canada. MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, Scott is straining at his chair there. MR. ALVAREZ. Yes. The matters that Bill Nelson just brought up and the matters that Jim Clouse brought up on the Federal Register are matters that will eventually come to the Board for its decision.  So if the Presidents want to express some views that the Board should consider when the Board is formally presented with those matters, that could be helpful; but they are not matters for the Board to discuss in todays meeting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  There are too many items here.  We are not going to have a quasi-decision process here.  Okay? So we will poll the Committeecan we do that?and 
         get feedback from everybody.  If you havent had time to think about these issues, we will get back to you after the meeting and get feedback on the relevant issues, and we wont take a decision until we hear.  But I would still like to have an opportunity for people who would like to make arguments or comments on any of these issues to do so now.  President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG.  Just a suggestion.  It would be helpful to me, given the breadth of choices among us, if there was following this meeting a one-page summary of each list of questions, and then Id feel much more comfortable responding to that after some thought than to try to give an answer at this point. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Brian, would that be possible? MR. MADIGAN. Yes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Nevertheless, we could have any interaction, discussion, comments, or input anyone would like to have at this point on any of these issues.  Anyone?  Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of points not on the Board matters, Scott. On Chriss points, I think the small number of large firms is consistent with the way we do primary dealers, but I do think it is important to have criteria that can be easily justified about why 
we are doing a small number of large firms.  I mean, in this case we are borrowing money, right, rather than lending it? MR. BURKE. Right. 
MR. KOHN. Right. So its not clear that the risk of the counterparty is the right criterion, but it could be the size that you can execute in and the speed with which you can execute.  I think you just need to be very clear on the criteria so that its easily defensible when people say, Why arent you doing it with every small person who wants to lend us money? 
           I think putting the RCAs on hold is a good idea.  They always seemed very complicated to me and potentially bifurcating the fed funds market, and I think that, if we can get it done without that change, we should.  Maybe we need them, but I think putting them on hold is a good idea and concentrating on the reverse RPs and the term deposits is the right way to go.  I would be fine with a small real-value test with the rate thing. On the swaps, this is more difficult.  I think the swaps were a very, very useful instrument in the recent crisis, and it wasnt just about particular institutions.  It has come down to that, I think, as the crisis unwinds. It has come down to that both in our domestic facilities and in our international facilities.  But at the height of the crisis, there was a generalized demand for dollar funding that the markets were unable to meet because there was segmentation.  There was a lack of arbitrage.  There was a hoarding of liquidity.  And the swapsparticularly once they got to be open endedwere 
very, very important in both relieving pressure on the markets and building confidence. I like the idea that the home country central bank is in charge of the lending for the most part.  Thats where the problems are going to be.  Thats where the fiscal issues are going to arise.  So to the extent that the home country central bank can do the lending, thats a benefit.  And I think the point implied by President Lacker about reserves is a good one, but the problem with relying on reserves is that there is a limited amount of reserves that any particular central bank has, and I know in talking to people from the ECB, a problem they had was mobilizing the reserves in the various national central banks. So I think the idea of this swap facility was very, very useful.  Its important that we have something that is ready to activate on short notice and that we keep the machinery oiled at least for a small number of central banks, the Big Four that Nathan talked about.  And I guess in theory that standby lines will do that.  There could be some sort of contingency facility that you also tested on a 
        periodic basis.  In some sense Im indifferent about how it is done, but I think it is important to have it there. I am much more torn about the Mexican swap line, to tell the truth.  I worry about emerging market swap lines.  I worry that well have to get into the business of judging whether the underlying policies in that country are good.  In this case, we had a generalized demand for dollars all over the world.  So smearing the dollars all over the world was a good way of dealing with that.  The next crisis could be more particular to an individual economy.  President Hoenig and I were in Mexico about two weeks ago, and it was quite striking, I think, Tom, that the Mexicans as well as the visitors thought that it was a pretty troubled economy with lots of problems.  I guess Im worried that well get involved in something that is particular to Mexico rather than a general dollar liquidity shortage.  I recognize that the Mexican economy, as well as the Canadian economy, is deeply integrated with oursit is in our interest that it not be destabilized in some sense. It would be important, as I think Nathan mentioned in his briefing, to come back to the FOMC before any of these swap lines are activated for the first time.  I would not delegate it to the three of us on the subcommittee.  I would want the FOMC to do it, and I think we need to be careful about how we specify the criteria under which the swap lines would be activated in the material that backs it up, that somehow we make it clear that, if there is a very specific problem keyed to the specific economy, other ways of dealing with itthrough the IMF, the Administration, the Congress, if the United States is going to provide support in that caseare more appropriate than using the Federal Reserve, bypassing those other channels.  I am still a little concerned about the Mexican part of this thing. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, you had a two-hander? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I had more than a two-hander. 
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Oh, okay.  One moment.  I just wanted to say on the counterparties that theres not any particular reason that this cant be done in stages.  I think its important that we have an open process and criteria and so on, but given the exigencies of trying to get this up and running in a reasonable amount of time, why cant we just do the ones that meet certain criteria in terms of size and capacity and so on first, and then as we did with the TALF, for example, go on to a broader set of counterparties?  I just raise that possibility.  Okay. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  On the counterparty issue, I guess the question I have would be, Will there really be much interest by smaller counterparties given that giving funds to us is not really different from giving funds to the U.S. Treasury in the T-bill market.  Its not as though we have a very special thing here thats going to be particularly attractive to small investors.  So it seems to me that we want to find out how much interest there is before we design a very complicated mechanism that might or might not be of interest to them.  And I would reinforce the Chairmans view that theres no reason, if there is an interest, that you couldnt go to the large ones first and then broaden it out over time.  I think its very clear that you want to be able to have the capacity to go largeto President Lockharts point earlierand if you cant do a lot of money, then this is really a bit of an illusion in terms of its effectiveness. Let me just go through the other ones very quickly.  RCAs on hold, I agree with that.  I think cash operations, real-value operations, make sense.  We just have to be very clear that its just a test.  As far as Mexico is concerned, I share a lot of Governor Kohns concerns about going from generalized market problems to country-specific problems.  One way to get around that might be to require that Mexico continue to be rated investment-grade.  I think theyre triple-B plus.  So if they were to drop below that, then you could argue that youre really morphing from something thats 
    more into a country-risk issue. Obviously the issue I think you are raising, Governor Kohn, is the issue of our getting involved in true credit risk with a sovereign entity, and thats something that I think we should be very uncomfortable about if we really think that is above a meaningful threshold.  Other than that, I think the four counterpartiesthe ECB, the SNB, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Englandmake perfect sense to keep in practice, and I think the counterparty-risk issues there are pretty negligible. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher, did you have a two-hander?   MR. FISHER. Well, on the subject of Mexico, I think it is a difficult subject when you include Canada in the equation. Clearly, Canada is a higher-grade economy and would have a higher investment grade.  But, again, we think of them all as North America.  I have no problem with the four. If we think through this NAFA issue, there are delicate politics when you deal with Mexico because you are also dealing with Canada simultaneously.  So I would just ask you to bear that in mind.  I think Vice Chair Dudleys proposal may be a way to slice that, but the answer may be to leave it untouched, the $3 billion and the $2 billion.  Right now we have $3 billion to Mexico and $2 billion to Canada.  And I would just point that out. Like Tom Hoenig, I would like to have time to think about the other questions.  But I just wanted to point that out.  It is a very delicate issue, not because I am a Texan but just because of the nature of the agreement that we forged with these two countries as trading partners.  So maybe the answer there is to leave it alone.  But you cant treat one without offending the other. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You will have time to think about the issues.  Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Sure. Let me just add to what sounds like maybe a growing chorus on the currency swaps.  I certainly favor the currency swaps.  With the four central banks, in terms 
of the size, it strikes me that it should be just big enough to be a useful, well-practiced engine on both sides. And frankly, I dont know whether it needs to be as big as in the proposal to accomplish that objective.  If we found ourselves in a crisis, we could always amplify those to a greater extent. So in some ways I wonder whether the numbers that were proposed were, in an ambiguous world, large enough that it is certainly more than some kind of testing program but not large enough to make a huge difference in the context of a global financial panic.  I dont have better numbers in mind, but I think the idea of being operational with those four makes sense. With respect to the NAFA issue, I think it would probably make the most sense for us to let the temporary swaps extinguish on their own accord in February and put the new swaps in accord with the four, and then sometime later, after we are done hearing pleadings from the Singaporeans and the Koreans, then decide what we want to do in the context of this NAFA piece. But I wouldnt want to conflate that issue with the swap line because that in some ways begs the question, with the Koreans in particular, from whom we hear quite a bit. With respect to the reverse repo issue and the small banks, I guess this is really a question for Chris Burke and for Bill Dudley and the team, which is, Would there be a large financial 
institution that would be willing to do the work on this for us?  To see whether they would be responsible, for a fee, for aggregating the small institutions, verifying their interest in whether they, in aggregate, could be of some real use, given what we are trying to accomplish.  Because if I think about the relative scarcity of our resources, it could potentially be a good piece of business for someone, and that someone might not be us. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
   MR. LACKER. Yes. On the swap lines, I have never been a real big fan of these.  My affection rose slightly earlier in the year, but it was a transitory rise. [Laughter] I find my enthusiasm waning.  Basically, I dont think they solve an economic problem worth solving.  We have dollars out there, and maybe I am just really sanguine about the ability of the system to move dollars around. I guess at the end of the day that might be where we differ.  It has the disadvantage of our having to police other central banks use of the funds and not let them do foreign exchange with them and all.  So, broadly speaking, I wouldnt favor it because I think we can maintain the operational capability without the authorization for these things.  I think we can practice these things some way or another.  I think we can manage to maintain our human capital. On the foreign currency swaps, where we borrow a foreign currency in order to lend to one of our institutions, I think at this time horizon, nine months down the road, the vulnerability of any of these institutions, because of maturity transformation in a foreign currency, is entirely endogenous. It is entirely the choice of how they run their business, and I dont think there is any excuse at this horizon not to have pushed them out of the nest.  I dont know the details of these institutions, but I think we ought to be working toward pushing them to run their business in a way that they are not so vulnerable to that. As for the NAFA things, I think those are classic foreign exchange.  Its a vestige of our classic foreign exchange currency swap things that we have always opposed.  They are really 
fiscal policiesthe same reasons that Vice Chairman Dudley articulated. I am glad to hear that RCAs are on hold.  I didnt think they were worth pursuing, and they seemed to benefit mainly the GSEs.  As for the other things, I think a question we want to ask ourselves before this is, What sense of urgency do we really feel about reverse RPs and term 
  deposits?  I was struck by that chart that Brian showed us and the new section at the end of the Bluebook that discusses a sequence of potential statements that we could use for the exit.  I was struck that they placed primary reliance on these two mechanisms for draining reserves and held asset sales in abeyance. I would like to have the Committee really grapple with that.  I dont know why we wouldnt go to asset sales first.  If our balance sheet were as small as it would be, lets say, nine months from now without these deposits, would we issue a bunch of deposits to buy MBS? I dont think we would do that. I dont know why we would avoid selling MBS over the near term as we want to scale back reserve balances.  I think we ought to grapple with just how much urgency these things require before we go public and get everybody all excited about them. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, it seems as though more tools are better than fewer tools. MR. LACKER. I understand the more tools part, but here we are at the threshold whereI mean, we have already tickled their fancy in the financial markets.  And before we go too much farther down the road, I am not sure we shouldnt think of these as the backstop and asset sales as the primary tool. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.   
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just had one very quick interjection.  One of the values of the whole foreign exchange swap program during the crisis was not the swaps per se or the dollars that were extended but was the international policy coordination signal that was sent.  It is really hard to quantify the value of that, but I think it was actually very helpful to perceptions that central banks around the world recognize that this is a global crisis and responded collectively.  I think that actually was helpful. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. I guess I will start with swaps because that seems to be popular.  I share a lot of the concerns, actually, that Governor Kohn had.  Don, I thought I understood you to say that your inclination, which I would agree with, is that it is fine to keep these things on the shelf, but you dont necessarily want to delegate it to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee to make the decisions each time that it really ought to come back.   MR. KOHN. For the first draw. 
MR. PLOSSER. For the first draw. I found the argument in the memo a little strange about the transparency issuethat we wouldnt want to have it appear in the minutes that this was voted on. And I find that sort of anti-transparency, which I wasnt sure I found very 
compelling. The other thing I think about the swaps is that, as President Lacker was asking, many of these banks do have lots of dollars at their disposal.  Okay?  Given that, I would think one proper way to think about this may be that we would like them to use their own dollars as their first line of defense, rather than coming to us.  I dont know whether that really makes sense, whether we could price this in a way that would make that a sensible strategy, or whether it is even a desirable strategy in some sense, because if these things were operational on a continuous basis, would this be a kind of no questions asked way for them to request dollars? Or is it only reserved for crises?  So Id like to put their dollars on the line first, and Im not exactly sure how we would do that. I dont mind having these things on the shelf and ready to go and operationalized. I am a little concerned about the usage and whose dollars come first.  And I think putting the RCAs on hold is fine. 
     The other aspect is something that President Lacker returned to, which is the term deposits and the RPs. I kind of share his view in that I am not sure we have the tools in the right order, at least as suggested by some of the staff discussion.  But one question I had about the term deposits was, if the term deposits are eligible for collateral at the discount window, a bank could have a term deposit and turn around and post it as collateral at the discount window and borrow, taking out short-term reserves again.  It seems as though they would undo the term deposit by doing that. So what is the point of having the term deposit if they can turn around and undo it this way? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The discount rate is higher than the term deposit rate. MR. PLOSSER. So that interacts with how much that discount rate varies. But they would be willing to pay something to get that reversed.  It almost makes these things tradable at 
a fixed price for short-term reserves. Right?  And so how do we control, or would we control, 
that in terms of this conversion?  It seems as though we are defeating part of the purpose by doing that. MR. CLOUSE. Yes. Im sorry. There are lots of complications, obviously.  I think, to your point, if they were eligible for collateral, that would presume that the primary credit rate was substantially above the IOER rate, for example, so that there wouldnt be an incentive for them to use these particular classes of assets as collateral at the discount window to undo exactly the operation. And, of course, they have to worry not only about the spread, but also any nonpecuniary MR. PLOSSER. Well, suppose they did it today, posted the collateral at the discount window, and went to the TAF auction and borrowed 28-day money for reserves in the TAF auction at the minimum bid. 
  MR. CLOUSE. Of course, in doing so, they would be suffering a 25 basis point cost in that operation, so it wouldnt be an incentive.  MR. PLOSSER. Well, they are borrowing at less than the primary credit rate, right? That is what they would be doing today. MR. BURKE. I think the context for these tools is that we are in an exit strategy with rising rates. The spreads are much larger than they are now when everything is compressed.  The other side of that is, if we want banks to use the facility and be interested, our feeling was that you need to allow them either to break the trade if they needed funds or to be able to pledge it as collateral at the discount window if they needed funds. MR. PLOSSER. Well, but at the end of the day, that kind of undoes the purpose of the term deposits to begin with.  Right? I guess here is my point.  I think this is maybe part of what President Lacker may be getting ata lot of these tools interact with each other in how you would design them and how you structure them.  So rather than doing them on a one-off basis, we need to think of them in the context of how we are going to manage the discount window going forward. Are we going to have term primary credit?  Are we going to go back to overnight money? I think these things are interrelated.  And to get a sense of how they will play out, we need to think of them collectively in how they interact with one another, rather than on a one-off 
basis. I guess that is really what I am thinking about. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. We will just have to make sure that all of the pricing works. So, for example, there could be a prepayment penalty or something to take out the deposits. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Just a response to President Plosser.  I think from the standpoint that the smaller banks would be the ones that would tend to use these term deposits the most, and they 
 would be unlikely to use them if there were no way to get out of them in an emergency situation.  So they just need some way to reverse it.  It wouldnt necessarily be a pricing piecein other words, there is a penalty to do it. But as long as they know they could reverse, then they would be likely to use it. MR. PLOSSER. I am just saying that is fine, but then that undoes the purpose that we have for the term deposit, which is to reduce reserves or hit our target. MS. DUKE. Yes. I think the difference is the decisionmaking of an individual institution versus the aggregate, and so you have to set up something whereby the individual institution can make that choice. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im sorry.  Vice Chairman, did you have something? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  What was interesting as we went through the crisis was that, for the foreign central banks, there was clearly a very high threshold against using their 
own dollar reserves, liquidating their Treasury securities or whatever, to fund their domestic banks. We know that because they didnt do it, and they told us that they didnt want to do it because they thought it would be very confusing to the market in terms of what they were up to.  Was this some sort of foreign exchange intervention?  Or was it a sign of distress particular to their country?  We also know that there was a pretty high threshold because we actually charged them quite a bit for the foreign exchange swap lines relative to the fact that they are basically virtually a risk-free rate, yet they chose that rather than to liquidate their dollar reserves.  So I think you have to recognize that there is something special about the dollar reserves holdings that they have that they dont want to mess with.  There was a cost for them to engage in dollar reserves sales that seemed to be fairly significant as we went through the crisis. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want just to explain how I understand something and ask the question whether I understand it correctly.  It is really a comment in support of moving quickly, with a sense of urgency, counter to what President Lacker said, on the reverse repo counterparties and all of the other tools.  I think we need to address any uncertainty about our ability to drain. As I understand it, if we are going to make a decision to tighten or even signal in our statement that we are moving in the direction of tightening through the rate mechanism, we need to be able to execute an operation to move the federal funds rate, and that is going to require the draining of lots and lots of reserves. If we find that it is not feasible, realistically, to drain reserves in a time frame that is going to allow us to execute rate policy, then we are probably opting for an interest on reserves policy rate that is somewhat independent of the level of excess reserves. And if we are going to opt for that, then we need to begin to educate the market that our implementation of monetary policy is through interest on reserves.  So that is what I am thinking.  Tell me what I am missing or whether I dont understand something. MR. MADIGAN. President Lockhart, I think our view is that the primary tool will be the interest on reserves rate. But the experience to date leads us to have some doubts as to whether that will put a hard floor on the federal funds rate.  So were presuming that we will, in order to 
harden that floor, need to take at least some reserves out of the system.  Whether or not we will 
have to take a whole lot out at this point isnt clear, but it is possible we might have to.  That is why we have been working on a number of tools. MR. LOCKHART. In the old federal funds rate system, we used to operate with essentially about $30 billion to $50 billion, did we not, of excess reserves in order to create the supply to meet the demand that allowed us to hit that?  We are a long way from that, so that 
   suggests to me that we are going to have a hybrid system.  Is that it?  We bring excess reserves down by $300 billion or $400 billion and operate in that territory? MR. MADIGAN. Thats possible. Well, of course, pre-crisis, obviously, we didnt have interest on reserves. And so we have only very limited experience as to what the parameters will need to be in terms of the excess reserves rate and draining reserves to hit a particular fed funds rate target. MR. SACK. As I noted in my briefing, however, market participants are asking a lot of these same questions about the strategy.  I think right now the strategy is not well defined or well laid out.  So the questions they are asking are, Will the reserve drains take place ahead of the increase in the interest on reserves rate or concurrent with it?  Even if you are relying at least partially on the interest on reserves mechanism to work, how, then, will the appropriate level of reserves be decided?  So just how big will the drain be?  There is obviously a lot of room 
between where we are and where we were in the old regime, and I think they are not sure in terms of reserves where the Committee intends to end up in that range. MR. LOCKHART. Mr. Chairman, just to beat a dead horse here, many of us have been out reassuring the market that we have the tools. If there is uncertainty about that, I think we need to smoke that out and get as clear as we can as fast as we can.  I think there is a big sense of urgency around these issues. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree.  But I feel reasonably comfortable.  We think the interest on excess reserves could almost probably do the job by itself because, even if there is some gap, it is hard to imagine that, if you raised the interest rate on reserves high enough, it wouldnt bring up money market rates along with it. 
   The ability to drain reserves, sort of a belt-and-suspenders thing, is a second dimension of tightening. And if you look at Brians sequence of exit statements, the first statement of actual tightening combines an increase in the interest rate on excess reserves with a $200 billion drain or something like that.  And I am actually, I would say, moderately encouraged by what we have been hearing.  The staff has been extremely effective in getting these things up so that they can operate at large scale by the end of the year or early next year.  So I think we are in pretty good shape. Now, of course, we are in a new world, but I think we are in a pretty good shape.  It would be good to give more clarity to the markets, but my own sense is that what we want to do is to state policy in terms of our tools.  You know, the federal funds rate target is not going to be particularly informative.  What we are probably going to want to do the first time that we tighten is to say that we have agreed to do this to the interest rate on excess reserves, to do this to the primary credit rate, and to drain x hundred billion dollars of reserves.  And we can see what that does, and we can fine-tune it. I think that, clearly, we have the ability to tighten policy.  But what is not firmly complete is a sharp correspondence between our actions and money market rates. Obviously we know the direction, but we need to get some experience with that.  Then, I think the market is maybe a little overfixated on the question of sequencing and so on.  When we have more control of the timing and more understanding of these tools, it would probably pay us, in a speech or some other context, to lay out more clearly both what the sequencing would be and what the regime is going to be.  I mean, how are we going to express tightening and so on? But in terms of the fundamental ability to tighten policy, nothing I am hearing makes me think that we dont have that capacity. MR. LOCKHART. That is very helpful to me, just to hear your views on it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Just a quick comment on the unintended consequences of lists.  When we came up with the primary dealer list, I dont think anybody could have guessed that we would have a primary dealer credit facility.  So when I think of coming up with lists of counterparties, I just worry about the unintended consequences.  If we select firms based on size of institution, it might quickly be inferred that there is a broader reason to have the list constituted the way we have it. So when I think about that, it does seem that Governor Warshs suggestion that, to the extent that we can broaden it but make it manageable for the Desk to do, we avoid the unintended consequence of making it look like a list that was based on size that may be misinterpreted for other purposes.  I know it is much easier to deal operationally with fewer counterparties; but just given the perceptions that can be created by that, we might want to give some thought as to whether there are ways to broaden it so that we dont give that misperception. Then the second list is the list of countries.  We spend a lot of time thinking about stigma, and President Yellen and I were talking about this on the elevator coming up.  But to the extent that we could come up with a size criterion that made it very clear that, if a market got to this size then we would entertainits kind of the opposite.  It seems like having a much clearer criterion. One reason all of these other central banks want to be our counterparty is that we are signaling something.  If we have a swap line with Mexico, people are inferring a signal that we are comfortable having them as a counterparty.  I worry about stigmatizing the countries like Mexico and Korea and other countries that want potentially to be a counterparty in part for the signaling benefit. The way we get around that is if we have a very clear criterion that says, If you get to this size, then maybe we will think about having a swap line.  Maybe size isnt the 
  right metric, but coming up with some metric other than country-specific choices would make me more comfortable with that list as well. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The North American location is hard to change.  [Laughter] President Yellen, you had a two-hander? MS. YELLEN. Yes. I just wanted to support that point.  We were discussing this, and I agree with President Rosengrens comments. I do think we should think about, if we stigmatize this larger group of countries, what their response might be.  For example, they might not feel so happy about having unfettered capital flows or having subsidiaries or branches of U.S. or European-based multilateral banks in their countries.  They might change the way in which they supervise and regulate those operations, if they thought it was not automatic that they would get access to dollar liquidity in the same way they did in this crisis. If I could justthis is the only thing I want to comment onrespond to President Plossers comment on this, that ideally they have large stocks of reserves and we should want to encourage them to use those reserves first before drawing on us.  I am not sure that is actually true. I think that the distinction here is similar to the old one between inside and outside money.  The reserves that they hold are equivalent to inside money.  When they sell dollar reserves they have in a crisis situation to provide liquidity to their banks, it is a propagation mechanism for causing exchange rate movements and international transmission of the disturbances that they are suffering. In contrast, when we provide liquidity, we are printing money.  We are adding to the stock of outside money, and we circumvent those repercussions.  So, in a crisis, the dynamics arent the same.  There is a good reason to have this kind of facility. MR. TARULLO. Janet, I think your comment may have answered my question about your first observation. So you would favor a broad range of permanent swap facilities? 
    MS. YELLEN. You know, I dont know what the right answer is, but I am worried about restricting it to these four.  President Bullard mentioned this concern as well, and I think President Rosengren is suggesting one way to use criteria to maybe broaden the group.  But I am quite concerned about singling out these four and not making it larger.  I understand there are political issues around that and boundary problems and so forth.  But I am concerned about limiting it to these four.  And there could be economic consequences.  If you take a country like Korea and you say, Well, we are not putting you in the same category as before, beyond what they might do with our banks, they may decide they need an even larger war chest.  They may be more reluctant to have current account adjustments.  It could have implications for MR. TARULLO. So you are kind of for swaps but are leaning toward more rather than fewer. MS. YELLEN. Right. MR. TARULLO. Okay. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The four big ones clearly have far bigger banking sectors than any other countries in the world.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up and echo the points that President Yellen was just making.  We have talked a lot here about swaps, and it has always been a very intuitive thing about what countries are included and which are not and why not. I think what we need is to lay out a policy for why countries are in and why countries are out, and then we would have something to say when Singapore comes to us as to why we are making the decision that we are making.  I understand it is wrapped up with other sorts of 
geopolitical considerations. But there should be some sort of basic criteria that will delineate why certain countriesI can imagine Asian countries being moderately upset that the Swiss are 
       in, for instance. When I say Swiss, Its a small country, come on.  This is an old club that you guys have been fostering for years.  And You just dont like us because were in Asia.  I can imagine that that is sort of the attitude.  So if we could delineate a clearer policy about why we are doing this, that would also help us a lot on the Mexican situation and Canada, which has been inherited from the NAFA treaty. But you guys all know this.  It is all very sensitive because of the difficulties of assessing country risk and really saying, Hey, your economy is not up to this.  So that is where I think we should go.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have two-handers from Presidents Plosser and Lockhart. MR. PLOSSER. Yes, I had a quick comment.  Janet, I think were talking about two different things.  My support for the swaps early in the crisis is exactly the point you were making of the difference between inside and outside money, and I understand that.  I was more concerned about having these lines of swaps continuously open in normal times whether we really wanted them used or whether, as Vice Chairman Dudley suggests, we price them in a way that prevents their usage except when a crisis might occur. I think that was where I was going. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Nathan, arent these facilities to four central banks effectively providing liquidity facilities through the central bank to at least three and maybe four major Eurodollar markets that would operate just as we did?  They have foreign bank organizations that can get liquidity in a time of crisis.  So South Korea or Thailand or whatever would be going to market conceivably in one of these places to get their liquidity; is that right? MR. SHEETS. Yes, absolutely.  The memo that we put forward didnt have a lot of quantitative indicators for these economies.  Weve gone down that path in the past, and the problem we have is that there is a whole range of different thingscomparing apples and oranges. 
        That makes it very difficult to compare.  But in this particular case, one of the reasons we came up with the recommendation that we did is, as the Chairman mentioned, the large size of the financial institutions from these four, and then the dollar funding markets in these economies clearly set them apart from other potential counterparties.  You really see a qualitative difference between the folks that we are recommending and the ones that we arent.  Given that there is such a gap, my sense is that its not creating stigma in saying that the dollar funding needs and the size of institutions for these four are different from those for the Koreans or the Mexicans.  I think they very much agree with that. Now, the justification for the North American ones is a little different.  As the Chairman mentioned, that has to do with the extent of our integration.  If Mexico blows up, there is a high probability that were going to feel some effect from that, or if the Canadians have some sort of financial tension, theres a high probability were going to feel that.  That is a different kind of relationship than exists with some of the Asian economies, even though we also very much value those relationships. The other point that I think is worth making here, which also helps with the stigma point, is that, over the last year, the stable of IMF facilities has expanded.  In particular, they now have a very attractive facility, the flexible credit lines, which Mexico has received, which is geared for top-tier emerging-market economies and is designed to give them significant access to liquidity, frankly, on more-generous terms and longer horizons than our swap lines would.  So there are other mechanisms out there in the global financial system to address these issues of stigma, including what the IMF has to offer. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, in one of my  previous comments to you about our ability to tighten, I should have mentioned this.  The backup to all of that is the Lacker strategy, of course, of selling the assets, which we can always do if necessary.  Anyone else?  MR. LACKER. Potentially a primary strategy.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im  just saying in terms of having some assurance that we can respond if necessary.  Okay.  Thank you for very useful input.  We will try to get something to you to get more comments shortly. We do need to quickly ratify domestic open market operations.  Could I have a motion?  MR. KOHN. So moved. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any objection?  Okay. Coffee is ready.  Why dont we take about fifteen minutes for coffee. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why dont we recommence.  Next on the agenda is the economic situation.  Let me turn it over to Dave Stockton to begin the presentation. MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With the incoming data having been unusually kind to us and changes in conditioning assumptions having only small and largely offsetting effects, the broad contours of the Greenbook forecast have changed very little since September.  As we had anticipated, real GDP turned up last quarter and appears to be on track to expand again in the current quarter.  On average, we project real activity to increase at an annual rate of about 3 percent in the second half of this year. Roughly speaking, we expect the economy to expand at a similar pace through most of 2010 before picking up more noticeably in 2011.  The main drivers behind our forecast of continued moderate growth are an accommodative 
monetary policy, an easing of tight credit conditions, a gradual waning of negative wealth effects, and an accompanying improvement in household and business 
sentiment. While these same factors have been a feature of our forecast since last spring, we now have some tangible evidence of their influence on financial and economic conditions. The stock market has moved well above its earlier lows, house prices appear to have flattened out, bond spreads have come in dramatically, and household and business confidence has rebounded. These improvements have been 
      accompanied by upturns in real GDP, industrial production, and importantly, final sales. In the household sector, consumer spending has been increasing at a moderate pace, even after accounting for the fluctuations induced by the cash-for-clunkers 
program, and home sales and housing starts have been trending up.  And in the business sector, equipment spending appears to be stabilizing after declining steeply for a year and a half. Of course, while the overall improvements that have occurred in financial conditions, spending, and production are supportive of our outlook, these developments far from ensure the continued steady gains in output that we are projecting. Indeed, if you view current conditions as inconsistent with the tenor of the recovery that we are projecting, we would agree.  Our forecast is predicated upon a further narrowing of the equity premium, an additional decline in bond spreads, some easing of currently tight credit conditions, and further improvements in household and business sentiment. While, in broad terms, events have been unfolding much as we had expected, there have been some surprises with which we have had to contend.  Once again, the incoming data on spending and production have been somewhat stronger than we expected, whereas the data on employment and hours have been weaker.  As a result, we now estimate that labor productivity increased at an average annual rate of about 5 percent through the first three quarters of this year.  With both our statistical filtering models and the anecdotal reports suggesting that some of these increases will be permanent, we raised our estimate of the level of structural productivity in this 
forecast. Given this higher level of structural productivity, we now think businesses will have less need to increase labor input in order to meet rising product demand.  As a consequence, we postponed the projected bottoming-out of employment until early next year, with noticeable job gains not expected to be evident until the spring.  
Accordingly, the unemployment rate is now projected to peak above 10 percent in coming months and to recede to 9 percent by the end of next year and to 8 percent in late 2011a path that is about  percentage point above that incorporated in our September Greenbook. Beyond dealing with the crosscurrents in the incoming data, we confronted only small and largely offsetting changes in the major factors conditioning our forecast.  A slightly weaker dollar, somewhat faster growth in foreign activity, and a gradual spur to demand from the higher level of potential output were pluses for projected growth of real GDP. But these favorable influences were more than offset by a weaker stock market and higher oil prices.  On net, we edged down projected growth of real GDP a tenth in both 2010 and 2011to increases of 3.4 percent and 4.4 percent, respectively. Because the basic contour of the forecast and its rationale are so similar to our previous projection, I thought I would organize the remainder of my remarks around 
      four questions that could be raised about our projection, especially in light of recent developments.  First, are we giving too little signal to the recent strength in the readings on spending and production?  Second, are we giving too much signal to the recent weakness in the data from the labor market?  Third, and in the opposite direction, are we headed for an extended jobless recovery?  And fourth, with fiscal impetus likely to fade and the inventory cycle providing only a transitory lift to production, why are we forecasting a sustained acceleration of activity? Let me start by addressing the question of whether we are reading too little signal into the unexpected strength in the recent data on spending and production.  As you know we revised up again our estimate of the growth of real GDP in the third quarterin this forecast about 1 percentage point, to 3 percent at an annual rate.  But rather than propagating forward any of that impulse to growth, as might be suggested by some models of real GDP, we have actually revised down the growth of real GDP in the current quarter about  percentage point, to an annual rate of 2 percent.  We think that there are a few reasons to believe that the third-quarter GDP figures overstate the underlying pace of the expansion. For one, we are skeptical of the BEAs outsized estimate of the positive contribution of motor vehicle inventories to third-quarter GDP.  In my experience, most folks would rather have bamboo shoots placed under their fingernails than have to sit through an explanation of light truck inventory valuations.  [Laughter] So perhaps this will be a painful introduction for President Kocherlakota to some of the 
more arcane aspects of the forecast. While models of truck inventories are found infrequently in the American Economic Review, these types of models are a mainstay where most of my important results appear, the Journal of Obscure and Largely Useless Facts. [Laughter] We do a fairly detailed accounting of motor vehicle inventories by make and model, and we dont see in the data the massive shift in the composition of inventories toward higher-valued vehicles that is implied by the BEAs figures. To be sure, we miss from time to time, but rarely by the  percentage 
point of real GDP implied by the published data.  In the forecast, we assume that a 
more normal composition of motor vehicle inventories will be established in the 
fourth quarter, with a corresponding deduction from the contribution to real GDP growth. A second reason to discount the strength in third-quarter GDP is that some of the gain reflected a surge in defense spending.  Because outlays are constrained by the 
level of appropriations, some of last quarters spending probably came at the expense of spending this quarter. Finally, we have also discounted some of the recent strength in consumer spending. Here, however, Ill admit that we are on more uncertain terrain.  Real PCE excluding motor vehicles increased at annual rate of 2 percent in the third quarter, about  percentage point faster than we had projected, pushing the saving rate down to 3 percent. With income so weak, consumer credit conditions tight, and 
         confidence still at a low level, we have responded to the unexpected strength by marking down our estimates of the change in real PCE for the next few months. The bottom line is that we do read the incoming data as suggesting that the economy is stronger in the second half of this year than we had previously thought, but not by as much as the upward revision to the third-quarter increase in real GDP might suggest. The second question I posed is whether we are taking too much signal from the recent weakness in the labor data.  After all, the decline of 210,000 in private payrolls in September was only about 100,000 jobs weaker than our expectation, and the rise in the unemployment rate to 9.8 percent was in line with our forecast.  Yet we weakened employment appreciably in coming months and raised projected 
unemployment. As I mentioned earlier, in light of continuing upside surprises in labor productivity, we felt a balanced reading of the data would include ascribing some of this strength to permanent increases in the level of structural productivity.  Many of you have reported stories from your contacts suggesting that, under enormous pressure, firms are finding ways to innovate to cut costs.  Moreover, the recession has probably led less-efficient capacity to be taken offline, with positive consequences for 
average labor productivity. In the short run, given our forecast for aggregate demand, these changes result in a weaker projected labor market. Indeed, some of you may be concerned that we didnt move far enough in this direction and might wonder why we arent forecasting a more protracted period of jobless recovery.  In our forecast, we raised our estimates of the increase in structural 
productivity for last year and this year but have just carried that higher level through to 2010 and 2011. Implicitly, we are assuming that businesses have already achieved most of the outsized efficiency gains available to them.  But it is certainly possible 
that they could have a lot further to go on this front. We illustrated a productivity-driven jobless recovery in an alternative simulation in the Greenbook. According to that simulation, if increases in actual labor productivity were to average about 3 percent per annum over the next few years 
rather than the 1 percent pace we are projecting, the unemployment rate would still be above 9 percent at the end of 2011.  We acknowledge that this is a distinct risk. But we see this possibility as balancing the risk that, by raising structural productivity in the baseline forecast, we may have overreacted to what will ultimately prove to have been a cyclical pop in output per hour. In those circumstances, once the uncertainty about the durability of the recovery recedes, firms could well move more aggressively to increase hiring.  I should note that, in defense of the baseline forecast against these two alternatives, our employment projection is consistent with initial claims continuing to drift down at about the same pace that they have in recent months. 
      The fourth question I posed was, Why do we think that there will be a gradual acceleration of activity, especially in 2011, even as the stimulus from fiscal policy fades and the boost from the turn in the inventory cycle plays out? One reason is that, in contrast to some outside forecasters, we see the contribution to growth from inventory investment, at least outside motor vehicles, as likely to be a fairly steady positive through 2011, adding about  percentage point to the growth of real GDP next year and about  percentage point to growth in 2011.  These inventories have been liquidated at an increasing pace in recent quarters, and thus their eventual contribution to the growth of real GDP still lies ahead.  We are forecasting the inventory cycle to be stretched out because we anticipate that business caution and constrained credit availability will fade only slowly. As you know from reading the Greenbook, fiscal policy is expected to provide an impetus to real GDP growth of about 1 percentage point both this year and next and then to be a neutral influence on growth in 2011.  But this fading impetus is offset by an accommodative monetary policy and generally improving financial conditions, 
which are stimulating demands that are further amplified by positive multiplier 
accelerator forces. By 2011, these influences should be making their clearest mark on 
spending for durable goods, housing, and business investment, all of which are the components of demand most sensitive to the cost and availability of credit and capital. Even so, our projected rebound in these categories of spending still leaves investment shares low by historical standards.  For these reasons we continue to see the baseline forecast as the best bet in an admittedly wide range of possible outcomes.  The major news of note on the inflation side of our forecast has been the further upward shift in the path for crude oil prices.  The corresponding upward revision that we have made to consumer energy prices has led us to mark up our projection for total PCE inflation by nearly  percentage point in the current quarter and in the first quarter of next year, to 2 percent and 1 percent, respectively.  Beyond that, our forecast is virtually identical to the one in September, as the indirect effects of higher energy prices are offset by the wider margin of slack in this forecast. Core PCE prices, which increased at an annual rate of 1.5 percent in the third quarter, are projected to gradually slow to a 1.1 percent pace in 2010 and a 1 percent pace in 2011.  Given the considerable slack that we expect to prevail in product and labor markets over the next two years, this disinflation is relatively muted owing to our view that longer-run inflation expectations will remain reasonably stable.  For headline inflation, the current and expected rise in energy prices results in an acceleration of total PCE prices from a 1.1 percent increase this year to an increase of 1.4 percent in 2010. With a much shallower rise in energy prices projected for 2011, headline inflation falls back to a 1 percent pace, the same as that of core prices.  Steve 
will continue our presentation.  MR. KAMIN. Since your last meeting, there hasnt been enough time to complete the playoffs and the World Series, much less to significantly alter our 
outlook for the world economy.  We feel more secure that a global recovery is under 
     way, and weve notched our forecast of overall foreign GDP growth a bit higher for the near term. Thereafter, however, our outlook is little changed, and we continue to grapple with some pretty thorny questions about how the recovery abroad will play out. As Nathan has reported to you in past meetings, the bounceback from recession has been strongest in those regions that were least implicated in the initial financial turmoil.  We had already judged that economic growth in emerging Asiawhich soared at a 14 percent annual rate in the second quarterrisked being too hot not to cool. Assuaging our concerns somewhat, incoming data suggest that emerging Asian GDP decelerated in the third quarter, but to a still-strong 9 percent; we have already received GDP numbers for China, at 9.8 percent; Singapore, at nearly 15 percent; and 
Korea, at 12.3 percent. In Latin America, as well, a strong recovery appears to be in progress.  The Brazilian economy had already grown nearly 8 percent in the second quarter, and indications are that a solid expansion has continued on the back of government credit programs, expansionary fiscal policies, higher commodity prices, and improvements in financial markets.  In Mexico, where GDP had plunged again in the second quarter as a result of swine flu and auto-industry cutbacks, recent increases in industrial 
production and exportsmuch of them tied to the reviving U.S. marketpoint to a sharp rise in activity in the third quarter.  All told, we now estimate that Latin 
American GDP, after falling 2 percent in the second quarter, rebounded nearly 7 percent in the third. Going forward, we anticipate that overall growth in emerging economies will step down to a more sustainable 5 percent pace over the next two years.  Such solid but unspectacular expansion is by no means assured.  The ongoing rebound may be more dependent than weve assumed on extraordinary fiscal and credit stimulus in China, which has generated important spillovers via higher imports and commodity prices, 
but this stimulus cannot last forever.  Additionally, the current surge in production in China and elsewhere may in part involve inventory restocking predicated on overly optimistic anticipations of export sales to the advanced economies.  But even so, the fundamental underpinnings of recovery in emerging markets seem fairly strong:  Their financial systems are in reasonably good shape; they are regaining access to international credit markets; and in most cases, they have scope for further stimulus of domestic demand if conditions warrant. We are, frankly, less confident about the prospects for the advanced foreign economies.  Data for the third quarter have been mixed.  In Japan, recent readings on industrial production, consumption, and trade have been quite positive and suggest 
another solid rise in GDP. And in the euro area, further increases in purchasing manager surveys, industrial production, and new orders suggest expansion.  However, GDP in the United Kingdom surprised us by dropping 1 percent in the third quarter, despite survey indicators pointing to moderate growth.  And Canadas monthly GDP series moved down in both July and, as we learned after the Greenbook projection 
    was put to bed, August as well. All told, we estimate that GDP in the advanced foreign economies grew 1 percent in the third quarter, its first positive reading since the first quarter of 2008 but a touch below what wed written down in September. Although we expect the recovery in the advanced foreign economies to quicken in the current quarter, we continue to struggle with the longer-term outlook.  On the one 
hand, financial stresses and balance sheet problems point to an unusually slow and prolonged recovery. In both the United Kingdom and the euro area, bank loans have been declining in recent months. While these declines may reflect weak demand for loans as well as weak supply, the stresses in the banking sector are worrisome, 
particularly given the bankcentric nature of intermediation in Europe.  On the other hand, deep recessions historically have given way to sharp recoveries.  Moreover, 
future economic growth should receive important boosts from the inventory cycle, the expansion of exports to the United States and emerging markets, and continued policy stimulus. Balancing these forces for recovery with the headwinds from the financial sector I described earlier, we continue to project economic growth through the forecast period of some 2 to 3 percent, a pace that only slowly erodes the extent of resource slack.  Partly as a result, headline consumer price inflation, which currently is running negative on a 12-month basis in most foreign advanced economies, picks up only gradually over the next few years. Accordingly, we continue to believe that major foreign central banks will wait until the second half of next year or early 2011 to start tightening policy. Anticipations of this extended period of low rates and ample liquidity appear to explain why long-term government bond yields throughout the advanced economies have remained low since this summer, even as the accelerating global economic recovery has supported increases in equity prices, declines in credit spreads, and upticks in a wide range of commodity prices.  Notably, WTI oil prices have risen some $8 per barrel over the intermeeting period, apparently reflecting optimism about future demand. Unlike the price of oil, the value of the dollar ended up little changed over the intermeeting period, but it garnered an awful lot of attention on the way.  A number of points are worth noting here. First, although the broad dollar index has fallen 11 percent since its recent peak last March, it had risen about 20 percent since the summer of 2008 and so remains above that previous low.  Second, we continue to believe that much of the prior upswing in the dollar was due to flight-to-safety flows and dollar shortages in funding markets and that, as Brian Sack suggested earlier this afternoon, the fall in the dollar since the spring has principally reflected the reversal of those developments as financial stresses have abated.  The contained nature of U.S. Treasury yields might seem to contradict this narrative of rising appetite for risk, but as I noted earlier, foreign bond yields have also remained quiescent, likely anticipating a long period of monetary accommodation.  Furthermore, we have seen little evidence that foreigners, particularly in the official sector, are shifting out of dollars to a significant extent or that any other sort of disorderly conditions are materializing. 
 Finally, the decline in the dollar to date will lend important support to U.S. economic activity.  At present, we anticipate that U.S. net exports, having added some  2 percentage points to U.S. GDP growth during the first half of this year, will have a roughly neutral influence thereafter as the stimulus from a sharp recovery in exports is about offset by a similar expansion of imports.  An alternative simulation included in the International Developments section of the Greenbook, which shows the effects of a 10 percent decline in the real broad index of the dollar, provides some sense of the implications for the outlook had the dollar remained at its March peak:  Export growth would be some 2 to 3 percentage points lower, import growth about the same  amount higher, and U.S. GDP growth as much as 1 percentage point lower by the second half of next year. As well, inflation would be about  percentage point lower.  Accordingly, the depreciation weve seen to date has helped to reflate the economy while avoiding becoming disorderly.  Going forward, we project much more gradual dollar depreciation, as is our wont, but we will be monitoring exchange markets carefully for any more-abrupt shifts.  Brian Madigan will now continue our 
presentation.                                                       2 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). MR. MADIGAN.2  I will be referring to the package labeled Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants Economic Projections.  Exhibit 1 depicts the broad contours of your projections for 2009 to 2012 and over the longer run.  Most of you continue to project a protracted economic recovery, with the unemployment rate declining slowly and inflation remaining subdued over the next few years.  Based on your accompanying narratives, most of you anticipate that about five to six years will be needed for the economy to converge fully to its longer-run path.  However, some  of you stated that the convergence process might well require seven or eight years, while a few of you expect inflation to reach its longer-run rate in just a few years but anticipate that the convergence process for the real economy could take somewhat longer. Exhibit 2 reports summary statistics regarding your projections for 2009.  Your previous projectionscollected in conjunction with the June FOMC meetingare provided in italics, and Greenbook forecasts are included as a memo item. Your current projections for real GDP growth this year have a central tendency of about minus  percent to zero, around a percentage point higher than in June.  The GDP decline during the first half was a bit sharper than most of you expected at the time of the June meeting, which took place a few weeks before the BEAs publication of its preliminary second quarter release and its substantial downward revision for first quarter. Regarding the second half, most of you now anticipate 3 to 3 percent real GDP growth, a couple of percentage points higher than the central tendency of your projections last June. Some of you noted that the recent pickup in economic activity 
was importantly influenced by transitory government program
clunkers and the first-time-homebuyer tax credit. 
     Your projections for the fourth-quarter average unemployment rate are about the same as those made in June, and your forecasts for inflation for the year as a whole are also little changed. However, for the first half of 2009, overall and core inflation came in somewhat lower than most of you had anticipated.  For the second half, most 
of you revised up your forecasts for overall inflation, probably reflecting at least in part the recent increase in energy prices, and many of you shaded up your forecasts for core inflation. Exhibit 3 tabulates the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for calendar years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run.  The broad contours of 
these projections are much the same as in June.  Most of you anticipate that real GDP will increase 2 to 3 percent in 2010 and then accelerate by about a percentage point to about 3 to 4 percent in 2011, with growth remaining brisk in 2012.  A few of you made modest revisions to your estimates regarding the longer-run sustainable rate of GDP growth, but the central tendency of longer-run growth projections is virtually unchanged at 2 to 2 percent. Most of your unemployment rate projections for 2010 and 2011 moved down a notch since June, perhaps reflecting stronger near-term growth, but nearly all of you still expect the unemployment rate to remain above 8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. Moreover, nearly half of you made upward revisions to your projections regarding the rate of unemployment that is sustainable over the longer run; the central tendency for these projections now stands at 5 to 5 percent, roughly  percentage point higher than in June. As in June, most of you see the outlook for inflation as subdued over the next several years. Your projections for total PCE inflation next year have a central tendency of about 1 to 1 percent, a bit above the central tendency of your core inflation forecasts, perhaps reflecting lingering effects of increased energy prices.  
Most of you see total and core inflation next year running noticeably below the 1 to 
2 percent central tendency of your longer-run inflation projections, shown to the right for total inflation. Over 2011 and 2012, your inflation projections exhibit considerable dispersion, with a central tendency of roughly 1 to 2 percent and, by 2012, a range of about  to 2 percent. This dispersion apparently reflects substantial differences in your views of the determinants of inflation and, to a degree, differences in your estimates of economic slack.  Perhaps the staff briefing on inflation dynamics at the December meeting and the subsequent Committee 
discussion will further elucidate the reasons for these divergences. The left panels of exhibit 4 indicate that nearly all of you continue to view the degree of uncertainty surrounding your projections of both output growth and inflation as high compared with historical norms.  In your narratives, some of you cite continuing vulnerabilities in the financial sector as reasons for this elevated 
uncertainty, while others highlight the uncertainties associated with fiscal stimulus and persistent budget deficits. As shown in the right-hand panels, nearly all of you now judge that the risks to output growth are roughly balanced, with a sharp drop 
  since June in the number who see the risks tilted to the downside.  Most of you also continue to view the risks to the inflation outlook, the lower right-hand panel, as roughly balanced. However, a few of you see the prospect of protracted economic slack as tilting the inflation risks to the downside, while a few others point to the challenges in managing the Federal Reserves balance sheet, and possible adverse effects of fiscal policy on inflation expectations, as skewing those risks to the upside.  That concludes our presentation, Mr. Chairman.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Questions for our colleagues?  It must be a very good briefing.   MR. STOCKTON. As we used to say in Little League, Mr. Chairman, a walk is as good as a hit. [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im detecting a theme here.  Okay.  Then were ready to begin our go-round. President Lockhart, youre lead-off hitter.  MR. LOCKHART. Lead-off hitter [Laughter].  Singles and doubles, Mr. Chairman.  Despite better-than-expected economic growth in the third quarter, the sentiment of my Sixth District directors and business contacts has neither improved nor deteriorated substantially since our last meeting. The current tenor of business activity is flat to moderately more positive, but where it is more positive, there is uneasiness that improvement may not be sustainable. Several directors reported conversations citing uncertainty about the future policy environment, including health care policy, as retarding hiring and investment.  We also heard skepticism about the durability of private spending absent stimulus programs.  A number of my contacts said that orders and top-line revenue would have to grow a great deal and be sustained for many months before new full-time hiring or capital expenditures would be undertaken.  Firms reported that they have ample ability to expand their business with their existing labor force and temporary labor if needed.  However, few expect a significant upturn in orders in the near term.  
        Our inquiries about capital expansion got more than a few incredulous looks.  Capital spending for business expansion does not seem to be a realistic consideration for most of our contacts. I continue to hear that small businesses are struggling to find adequate financing to support any expansion and rehiring.  Work done recently by the Atlanta research staff on the makeup of job losses points to the unusually large concentration of job losses in the small business sector.  Through the end of 2008, businesses with 50 or fewer employees accounted for about 45 percent of net job losses in the recession.  Firms of this size accounted for only about 9 percent of job losses in the 2001 recession.  Our contacts also broadly confirm the view that a major commercial real estate problem is developing.  We have the view, along with others, that commercial real estate will have a sizable downside impact on regional and small banks.  I am concerned that the interplay of the commercial real estate correction and weak job growth due to constrained credit is shaping up to be a serious headwind. To sum up, anecdotal feedback from our recent contact cycle does not validate any reliable trend in the stronger GDP numbers and paints a picture of highly cautious and extremely reluctant business actors.  That said, I think it is reasonable to incorporate solid near-term growth in second-half estimates, but I remain skeptical about the medium term.  I remain to the pessimistic side of the Greenbook forecast, and I am not inclined to make too much of improved recent and near-term expected data in thinking about exit timing and communication. As regards the inflation outlook, incoming price data suggest a little more disinflationary pressure than I had assumed in June.  In the forecast submitted with this meeting, I marked down my core inflation projection a little, and I judge the inflationdeflation risks to be roughly balanced. In preparation for this meeting, I and my staff had a number of conversations with financial market participants.  There was uniform satisfaction with the continuing normalization of financial 
            markets.  Contacts expressed more confidence and reported that they believed the markets, in general, have confidence in the idea that the Fed has the tools to execute an exit strategy.  A universal concern, however, is the strategic approach to and timing of the exit.  My contacts see some risk of a premature exit, a concern I share. But what was most notable in my recent conversations was concern about premature communication of exit intentions and the market reaction to changes in the Committees statement wording.  I wont venture any further into tomorrows discussion.  So I will stop there.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess Im up second.  So I dont know what that means Im supposed to do as a baseball player.  Get on base, right? MR. TARULLO. Advance the runner. MR. PLOSSER. Advance the ball?  [Laughter] 
PARTICIPANT.  Sacrifice. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Hit to the right side.  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER. Hit to the right side behind the runner, right?  That should be easy.  [Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business conditions in the Third District remained sluggish in September and October.  While regional business contacts continue to anticipate a recovery in the months ahead, expectations of the recoverys strength seem to have moderated somewhat, and uncertainty abounds.  So let me touch on a few highlights. Our manufacturing surveys general business activity index fell from 14.1 to 11.5 in October. However, I am not too concerned about this slight drop.  The index has been positive now for three consecutive months.  The last time that occurred was in November 2007.  The index of future activity remains high, although it was down a few points from September.  It is well within 
          recovery ranges from past experience.  Payroll employment continues to decline in the region and at a slightly faster pace than reported six weeks ago, but the rate of decline still is less negative than that of the nation as a whole.  The average unemployment rate in the three states in the District rose 0.2 percentage point, to 9.2 percent, but still remains below the national figure.  The Districts commercial real estate market continues to be weak, as it seems to be everywhere.  Our contacts tell us that they are not expecting any improvement there until 2011. At the national level, recent data on the economy continue to point to an emergent recovery.  Financial market conditions continue to improve, but the labor market remains under severe stress, and I anticipate further modest increases in the unemployment rate.  Nevertheless, the pace and character of real activity appears to be consistent with employment growth turning positive in the not-too-distant future.  I have become more confident rather than less that the emerging recovery will be a sustainable one even after the effects of fiscal and monetary stimulus begin to wane. On balance, the recent data on third-quarter growth came in somewhat stronger than I expected in our last forecast submission.  This has led me to revise up slightly my own projection for growth in 2009, compared with that in June.  But the basic structure and shape of my forecast for 2010 and beyond remains largely unchanged from my June forecast.  I anticipate that the recovery will gain more solid footing as we move into 2010 and real growth will average about 3 percent in 2010 through 2012. This is somewhat weaker growth in output than in the Greenbook.  I suspect the differences between our forecasts reflect different assumptions about the magnitude of the impact of the fiscal stimulus and the evolution of natural or potential output.  Indeed, if there is a risk to my GDP forecast, it is likely to be to the upsidethat is, economic growth could easily turn out to be faster than the 3 percent average that I am predicting. 
          My forecast for inflation continues to differ from the Greenbooks.  In the near term, I expect inflation to remain rather benign, but I expect it to drift up over the next couple of years.  In contrast, the Greenbook anticipates disinflationary pressures over the forecast period based on low levels of resource utilization and large output gaps.  I believe that we will ultimately maintain a moderate rate of inflation, but to do so will require a significantly higher path for the fed funds rate than is in the Greenbook. My view of optimal policy, therefore, assumes that the fed funds rate will reach 2 percent by the end of 2010, still very low by historical standards.  Associated with an increase in the funds rate, I assume that we will begin reducing the level of excess reserves in the banking system through our various tools that weve been discussing. My inflation forecast is shaped by my views about the fundamental drivers of inflation dynamics.  I concur with the broad thrust of President Bullards memorandum on output gaps.  I have been arguing for some time now that I am skeptical that low resource utilization and large negative gaps as typically measured are generically useful concepts for thinking about the structural determinants of inflation dynamics.  Aside from the difficulties of measurement surrounding gaps, the current state-of-the-art empirical models of inflation dynamics, such as the New Keynesian DSGE models, do not give clear guidance on the appropriate role of traditional output and employment gaps.  That is not to say that we cannot build models where such gaps might matter.  We clearly can.  But it means that the nature of our debate is about the models and, just as important, about the nature of the shocks we are facing. We should remember that these newer models were developed, in part, as an outgrowth of the failure of earlier models to capture the instability in the inflationoutput dynamics.  Like President Bullards, my reading of the empirical evidencefor example, Stock and Watsons recent 
       work on Phillips curve forecastsis that gap or activity measures are not reliable predictors of inflation for the post-1970s U.S. economy.  Indeed, recent work by the Philadelphia staff looked at Phillips curve forecasts of inflation over the last six recessions.  Outside the double-dip recession of 1980 and 1981, gap-augmented inflation prediction equations would not have led to significantly better forecasts than benchmark autoregressive models.  Notably, this was also true in the 197475 recession, in which a fairly large unemployment gap opened up, and it is also true for the current recession. I am more persuaded by the theoretical and empirical evidence that indicates that inflation outcomes depend importantly on inflation expectations, which in turn depend significantly on our own credibility and commitment to price stability.  Philadelphia has its own New Keynesian DSGE forecasting model in which inflation dynamics are governed primarily by expected inflation and marginal costs, as these models tend to imply, and it suggests much greater inflationary pressures than in the Greenbook, especially when one conditions on the Greenbook funds rate path.  In that conditional forecast, inflation runs at about 5 percent by 2012.  The unconditional forecast from the model calls for a funds rate path that looks more like that embodied in the current futures market, but even in that forecast, inflation rates drift up noticeably over the forecast period.  Admittedly, different specifications of such models will likely lead to different inflation forecasts, but a key element of all these equilibrium models is the interplay between monetary policy actions, expectations, and economic outcomes.  They suggest that, if we respond in an appropriate and predictable manner to the shocks in the economy, inflation expectations will remain anchored, and inflation will remain stable. Fortunately, measures of medium-term and longer-term expectations of inflation have largely remained stable.  However, inflation uncertainty seems to be rising.  The Philadelphia staff 
     examined the cross-sectional dispersion of inflation forecasts from our SPF respondents since the 1980s.  To the extent that the forecast dispersion is lower when monetary policy is more credible, we can take comfort in the fact that the forecast dispersion today is quite a bit lower than it was during the 1980s.  However, dispersion measures such as the standard deviation or interquartile range have been trending up since 2005 and have risen noticeably since 2007.  This trend, I think, bears watching as it may be an early signal that the stability of inflation expectations may become fragile. The concern that Ive been expressing for the last several meetings is that we are creating a narrative that overemphasizes resource utilization as a determinant of monetary policy.  A key question we will face in the months ahead is when to begin the policy-tightening cycle.  The extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy actions taken to date raise the possibility that policy may have to be recalibrated at a time when potentially mismeasured gaps suggest that a combination of actions should remain in place.  The message we continue to drive home in our statement that stresses gaps and slack make this transition or recalibration more difficult and/or more disruptive than necessary, or it may even lead us to inappropriately delay action. More generally, I believe that the timing of our recalibration will mean that we will need to pay attention to more than just gaps and measures of expected inflation.  Given the extraordinary nature of our actions and the consequences for our balance sheet and the fact that we are de facto with a zero lower bound, we will need to focus on various quantities, such as the mix of required reserves to excess reserves, new loan creation, and general portfolio positions of banks as they seek higher returns for the massive reserves that we have forced them to absorb.  As banks begin to seek higher returns, excess reserves will be transformed into required reserves as the traditional money-multiplier mechanism begins to recover.  We may not be exactly sure where these funds are going.  
         They may be used to purchase short-term Treasuries, guaranteed government debt such as MBS, or some other duration-lengthening asset, or they may go into loans as risk appetites grow.  As a consequence, we may find it hard to identify the early stages of such transition by monitoring only prices, but it will be occurring nonetheless.  Thus, I believe that quantity measures should become an important and routine part of our policy discussions going forward and as we contemplate the timing of our exit strategy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy has generally performed better than the U.S. economy as a whole during the last two years.  Payroll employment nationally has declined about 5.4 percent since 2007, since the recession began.  In the District, for 16 metropolitan statistical areas, payroll employment has declined only about 3.7 percentbad to be sure but considerably better than the nation as a whole.  This generally extends across two-digit SIC codes.  One exception is education and health, which has actually grown 3.7 percent nationally during the same time period but has grown only 2.8 percent in the District metropolitan statistical areas. Very recent data on employment in the District, however, have been worse than in the nation as a whole, and were watching this very closely.  But the District data tend to be more volatile, as you might expect, and it is not clear at this point how meaningful they are, but I will report on that in the future. Eighth District unemployment is just over 9 percent in our sixteen MSAs.  Anecdotal reports indicateas many of you have noted and, Im sure, will notethat commercial real estate is a key concern.  The near-term outlook for this area is quite grim indeed.  Businesses are very reluctant to hire, and we are in an environment of continued business caution and continued caution on capital expenditures, in particular. 
           Nationally, I thought it was heartening to see the positive GDP growth number after four consecutive declines. I have actually seen only two positive numbers since joining the Committee.  [Laughter]  I have seen four negative ones.  So I hope that this is one in a long string here.  I was also heartened. I take this as hard evidence that the recession is ending and that we are in a position to recover from this very deep and very severe recession.  We certainly had an equity market rally through the spring and summer, but that was based on an expectation of actually better performance in the fall of 2009 and, I think, also the marking down of the probability of a very severe depression-like outcome during the spring.  That was an expectation of good numbers coming in.  So it was heartening to see a good number actually come in.  I expect that the economy will continue to grow in the fourth quarter and into the first half of 2010 and that the probability of returning to recession at this point is small.  I think history shows that the double-dip recession is actually not that common an outcome.  It could happen, but it is not that common. Based on both business contacts and models, I expect that labor market outcomes will continue to lag behind the rest of the economy, and I continue to be encouraged by growth globally, on the whole.  I was one who was very worried about the global nature of this downturn.  I thought we might get stuck in a new reality that we did not understand completely and that we had not faced in the postwar era.  That has turned out to be unwarranted.  We have a lot of growth globally, and I find that very encouraging.  I continue to believe that there is a near-term deflation risk and a medium-term risk of higher-than-desired inflation, and that is how I have continued to describe the inflation outlook.  I do think the near-term deflation risk is fading.  I am not quite ready to give it up completely; maybe if we make it all the way into 2010.  For instance, year-over-year CPI headline inflation is actually still negative. So I am still a little worried that, if we got some bad data over the winter, you could 
     get into a deflationary scenario.  But the risk of that is fading.  The medium termsay, twthree-yearinflation risk is rising because of large fiscal deficits and a very accommodative monetary policy, which may, in fact, overwhelm all other considerations. Inflation expectations are relatively stable, indeed; but in my opinion, it is a bit of an illusion. I think expectations are more at risk of becoming unmoored today than at any time in the 25 years prior to this crisis.  If we were a smaller, emerging-market type of economy pursuing the policies we are pursuing today, we would not do very well.  Investment would flee our country, and our currency would depreciate a lot.  We do not see those outcomes in the United States partly because were the big kid on the block.  We have a lot of size, and we have a reservoir of credibility on our side.  But those advantages do not guarantee success and should not lull us into complacency about the types of outcomes that can materialize when you put these types of policies in place. The Greenbook policy path for the fed funds rate seems unlikely to me.  I think we may be forced into a tightening action well before 2012, even though the 2012 date is actually consistent with the past behavior of this Committee.  In the past the Committee has not started a tightening cycle until two and a half to three years after the recession was over. That was the case in 1994 and again in 2004.  Our quantitative easing program as envisioned in the Greenbook looks suboptimal to me.  It is unclear to me why we should take a large position in agency MBS arguing that it influences long-term interest rates and then not adjust on that margin in reaction to incoming data on the economy.  This is a tool that we can and should use to carry out stabilization policy for the United States during the period when our preferred short-term interest rate instrument is near zero.  The Greenbook does not do this so far, as the key assumption is buy and hold for agency MBS with no change in purchases beyond those currently scheduled.  That sounds to me like a suboptimal 
        policy.  It should be a state-contingent policy, and I would like to see more along these lines.  But I will reserve the rest of my comments on policy for tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data seem consistent with third-quarter and fourth-quarter GDP growth averaging roughly 3 percenta welcome change after several consecutive quarters of decline.  However, although I expect the economy to continue to recover, it will likely grow much more slowly than previous recoveries. I remain particularly concerned that, as the monetary and fiscal supports subside, there will be insufficient private spending to make much progress in labor markets.  Growth in consumption and housing tend to be drivers in recoveries, and although both grew in the third quarter, they were supported by a variety of government programs, which are now in the process of winding down.  As a result, I expect that, by the end of next year, unemployment will not be much lower than its current level, an outcome quite similar to the Greenbook forecast.  I expect that, even by the end of 2012, the unemployment rate will be well above our estimate of the natural rate of unemployment.    The Greenbook assumes that credit conditions will ease, making credit more available for businesses and households.  I am concerned that banking conditions over the next year may well deteriorate.  For many banks, nonperforming loans are rising and rising faster than they are reserving for problem loans.  Thus I expect that capital constraints will not ease over the next year.  In fact, they might tighten. Research at the Boston Fed has found that forecasters tend to underpredict unemployment when the percent of bank assets in banks with a poor CAMELS rating is elevated.  Currently, the percent of bank assets in banks with a CAMELS rating of 3 or worse is high and climbing.  Supporting this concern is the decline in lending in the Call Report data, which are continuing to 
      worsen. In fact, if one splits the lending between banks with a CAMELS rating of 1 or 2 with those of 3 or worse, the declines in lending are much larger at institutions experiencing problems, in part because they are likely shrinking to improve their capital ratios. In light of the substantial excess capacity in the economy and given that credit is likely to remain constrained, I expect a gradual disinflation over the forecast period.  The Greenbook forecast for core CPI and core PCE looks like an annual step function bounded below by 1 percent.  My concern is that the inflation rate may not be bounded by 1 percent, and we may experience more disinflation than in the Greenbook forecast.  In part, this is the result of forecast equations in Boston, but in part, it reflects the incoming data on wages, salaries, and benefits.  The continued decline in the rate of growth of wages and salaries, especially in the context of rapid productivity growth, makes it quite unlikely that core inflation will reach my 2 percent target over the forecast period.  As others noted at the last meeting, this outlook represents continued poor outcomes for both aspects of our dual mandate.  I hope, but do not expect, that growth will be faster than most of us forecast.  This would at least diminish the length of the other extended period, the period for which unemployment remains severely elevated. In turn, while we can hope that anchored inflation expectations will keep inflation from falling more than the Greenbook envisions, even in a protracted period of significant excess capacity, I am concerned about the risks that expectations will move down or that they will not sufficiently offset the downward pressure from resource slack.  While potential output may have fallen and the natural rate may have risen as a consequence of the crisis from which we are emerging, it is difficult to imagine a shift so dramatic as to materially change the size of these resource gaps.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 
 MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, at our last meeting I portrayed our economic outlook from the Dallas perspective for the nation.  It resembled a checkmark, as you may remember, with a snapback in the third and fourth quarters, in the 3-plus percent range, before settling into a lower-shaped grade on the elongated side of the checkmark.  And you asked, I presume at the time only partially tongue in cheek, whether I was talking about that or a square root sign.  So I have given that a great deal of thought in the interim.  [Laughter] And I have explored with my colleagues and our business contacts the dynamics surrounding 2010, and that is what I want to talk about this afternoon. Now, the near-term outlook seems to have improved measurably because of the stabilization of inventory investment and a leveling-out of consumer demand; the effects of the fiscal initiative, like cash-for-clunkers and the tax initiatives surrounding housing; and the strengthening of demand for U.S. exports.  Certainly, the securities markets are healthier.  The cost of money for those who have access to the securities marketslarge businesses, not small businesseshas declined; levels have declined to very palatable levels. Despite these short-term improvements, we are, in my view, very far from being out of the woods. I am going to reflect some of the comments that have been made by others, starting with President Lockhart.  Wage and salary increases have fallen sharply.  Household finances are still under severe strain.  The deteriorating performance of consumer and CRE loans are still exerting new pressures on the financial system.  And the plethora of new economic and regulatory initiatives is creating uncertainty among business decision makers as referred to by 
President Lockhartuncertainty that appears to be retarding commitments to expansions of the workforce and to a commitment to cap-ex in the United States.  I think that the Greenbook 
baseline forecast underestimates the continuing drag on the economy from damage to the 
financial sector, deterioration and weakness in household cashflows, and uncertainty created by the new government initiatives.  It also assumes, in my view, a too-rapid response of the unemployment rate through a reduction in the output gap when these reductions finally do begin to take hold. My survey of CEOs confirms some of this drag. I do think it is important to footnote our research and that of the St. Louis Fed in publications from a couple of years ago that look at the last nine recessions and recoveries since 1954. They show that there is a strong correlation between the lengthy expansion before the recession and the degree of what we in Dallas call jobfulness of the ensuing recovery.  That is, there is a lot of talk about a jobless recovery.  That is really not the issue.  The issue is how many jobs are generated by an ensuing recovery. Inefficiencies in the use of labor and other factors accumulate with time.  The longer the time since the last recession, the greater the wave of reorganizations that follow. Reorganizations lead to a shedding of jobs within firms for an extended period of time during the correction or the recovery, and thus they create and contribute to the degree of jobfulness of that recovery. This is confirmed by the behavioral patterns that I am hearing from my corporate contacts. These contacts continue to be pessimistic about the prospects for top-line growth for 2010, though they generally feel that revenues have bottomed out.  They still plan to operate in a cost-containment mode.  They report littleactually noenthusiasm for expanding payrolls and cap-ex. This is very evident if you look at the large what I call logistics companiesFluor; Bechtel; Kellogg, Brown & Root; and othersare actually beginning to let people go.  Fluors CEO said that domestic cap-ex is deada pretty harsh statement.  The most negative in terms of cap-ex was AT&T. It reports that it cut cap-ex 15 percent in 2009.  I mention it because, 
 arguably, it is the largest single committer of cap-ex; roughly $18 billion a year was budgeted for 2010. At the same time, it is budgeting a head-count cut of 12,000 employees in 2010. The most positive I talked to, such as Texas Instruments, are budgeting some opportunistic cap-ex increases but plan no expansion of payrolls for the first half of the year, as they feel they can continue to drive productivity higher.  The theme of squeezing greater productivity out of existing workers, which Dave Stockton referred to in our last meeting, and out of existing assets remains a constant across all of my CEO contacts.  For example, Wal-Mart is planning on adding 11 million square feet of storage space in 2010.  Yet because of IT and other efficiency boosters, it will not increase its associated head count above 1.4 million.  It has an enormous employee base.  That 1.4 million is actually down slightly in 2009 from 2008. Regarding retail, the container ships that carry goods across the seas are operating below cost and continue to lose money.  The rails that take those goods from the ports to their distribution points report stability but no discernible pickup in end demand.  And my favorite metric, 178,000 freight cars, which would stretch 2,900 miles if laid end to end, and 28,000 locomotives have been laid up.  Even though Buffett announced this morning that he was acquiring Burlington Northern, the CEO of Burlington Northern reports that, in the same words, Christmas is dead.  These are not happy people that I talked to. MR. PLOSSER. Thats like Philadelphia sports fans. [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER. The retailers themselves report continued trends of smaller unit sales at lower prices and a shift to private labels and economy brands over a greater number of transactions, with volumes falling off as the month progresses.  This is confirmed by MasterCards data, which show year-over-year growth of transactions but lower average tickets.  Pricing power is nil.  Again, going to Wal-Mart, it reports that food price deflation in its average 
 market basket is 0.8 percent year over year through this week and has had a third consecutive month of slight deflation in general merchandise.  Inventories remain lean.  They are being managed surgically.  There is scant desire to build them overall.  Stocking is being regeared to just-in-time response in demand for specific items.  And I take note, with regard to retailers, my Bible, Womens Wear Daily, is reporting that retailers have started laying off workers in the month of October.  That is very unusual for the fall season. There are no complaints from the big boys about accessing the credit markets.  Indeed, they report far more robust and better priced credit markets.  AmeriCredit, which is a company I have started talking to, is interesting because it finances purchases of used automobiles and has 900,000 customers.  It reports that, thanks to the TALF facility and the improved tone in the ABS market, its borrowing costs, for example, have been cut in half.  So that is good news. But one reactionary theme has emerged as expectedat least as I would expect from the global operators. The combination of projected continued dollar weakness and low interest rates earned on excess cash held in dollars is incenting their treasurers to keep their cash balances abroad.  That phenomenon should wax and wane over time. Of less topical concern, and more disturbing to me, is the belief expressed by several that risk adjustments had better prospects for returns by investing cap-ex elsewhere.  If you have read the Wall Street Journal recentlyand we will have to check on the accuracyit estimates that the S&P 500 companies are carrying $1 trillion in cash on their balance sheets.  The last time we had that kind of carry on the balance sheets was the 1960s.  As I say, this is not your mothers 1960s. We live in a globalized world, and there are options for investing abroad.  I am finding a good many CEOs and CFOs who are planning to commit to cap-ex and deploy that $1 trillion in build-up in cash, plus additional cashflows, but very fewin fact, none out of the somewhat 30 
  that I spoke toare planning to commit it here in the United States, unless there is greater clarity about future policy initiatives. The grape-shot approach that the Administration and the Congress have followedannouncing so many policy initiativesis adding to uncertainty regarding progressive budgeting and planning for 2010.  I might note that those who have spent some time actually interacting with Mr. Summers and others at the White House have come back more concerned than placated, and this concern persists.  The bottom line is that there is a lot of hand-wringing and a great deal of hesitancy by my corporate contacts.  I would say that the mood is a little less sour, but still a little dour, and, Mr. Chairman, these anecdotal soundings do nothing to change my checkmark-shaped forecast. I continue to expect that, after this and the third quarters 3 percent plus growth rates, we will settle in 2010 to a slower crawl, say to 2 percent with unemployment hanging in at about 9.7 percent, which is I guess at the low end of our central tendency, as was presented earlier, and only in 2011, will growth ramp up to near and above 4 percent, with unemployment lingering above 8 percent well into 2012.  Now, that said, these are still positive numbers, and they beg the question of whether we should begin de-accommodating earlier rather than later.  That we will talk about tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Fifth District, the outlook hasnt changed much since our last meeting, so I will be brief.  Both our manufacturing and services 
indexes slipped a bit in October, but the overall manufacturing index remains in positive territory. Reports from our directors and other contacts remain decidedly mixed.  They say, for example, that many commercial real estate and banking markets continue to weaken, but they are also reporting more optimism in some sectors as well. 
  National economic reports also seem to remain mixed.  We are making progress toward a recovery, but clearly not all segments of the economy are participating.  Commercial construction continues to decline.  It is likely to be a drag on growth for some time.  People are losing jobs more rapidly than people are finding them.  And as long as that is happening, average consumers confidence in their income prospects is not likely to increase dramatically.  Moreover, the contribution from the inventory swing to top-line growth is bound to fade at some point, as is the contribution from the stimulus.   Nevertheless, I find myself somewhat optimistic, though cautiously so.  Consumer spending seems to be on a moderate upward trend, as does the housing market.  Business investment in equipment and software, in the aggregate numbers, seems to have stabilized.  And the end to the massive inventory liquidation will add at least somewhat to growth in the near term.  At this point, the distress in commercial real estate seems likely to be relatively manageable for the banking system taken as a whole.  And I think the decline in initial claims suggests that the overall job market is likely to bottom out reasonably soon.  I also like the fact 
that inflation seems pretty quiet now. In closing, let me just again note the passage in the Bluebook outlining potential sequences of statements going forward.  We will talk more about policy tomorrow.  I think it 
does make sense in this environment to look ahead, though, and to think about potential sequences of events and actions and see if we cant take them on board in crafting our statement today. I will also note the expansion of the extended period sentence introducing language that gives at least some suggestion of conditions under which we might start removing 
accommodation.  It would be useful for us to spend a lot of time talking about what we think 
 those conditions might be and reaching a modest consensus on what we could put in the statement about that.  I think that would be useful.  That concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Much as I indicated in our last meeting, the incoming data and reports from my business contacts continue to reflect an economy that is in the early stages of a modest recovery from a deep recession.  Business activity is expanding, and we expect that GDP growth will average 3 to 3 percent over the next year or so.  However, my 
contacts are expressing a good deal of uncertainty regarding sales and order flows in the first half of 2010, once the current inventory cycle has largely run its course.  In fact, although this is a swag to me, their reports feel more as though they expect a 2 percent growth rate than my own 2010 projection of 3 percent. On the positive side, businesses are certainly positioned to accelerate production when demand finally does improve, as it inevitably will.  All industrial segments currently have more than enough capacity in place to meet their near-term expected sales and order flows.  But like President Fisher, I heard too much commentary from my contacts suggesting that a lack of sustainable orders and sales developments could spark another wave of cutbacks, and I suppose your reports actually had those cutbacks in train.  This seems like a serious threat.  The positive third-quarter nonfinancial earnings reports were built on cost reductions, not revenue expansions.  If fourth-quarter revenue growth continues to be modest, I suspect there is a real possibility of businesses attempting a repeat of the third quarter.  For me, the odds seem tilted toward further risk aversion on the part of businesses in the first half of 2010. The financial landscape surrounding bank credit also continues to be a headwind for the outlook. This is not a large issue for large, high-quality firms with direct access to capital 
markets.  They are able to obtain funding at spreads they consider to be closer to normal.  But small and medium-sized companies that rely on bank credit continue to complain about onerous terms and an inadequate supply of borrowing options.  Have you gone out and spoken to your local businesses and community bankers lately?  Community and regional bankers respond that borrowers credit quality is substantially worse than these businesses acknowledge, but they also say that the only way they can improve their capital ratios today is to shrink their assets, much as President Lacker was talking about. Bottom line, there continues to be a modest credit crunch for small and medium-sized businesses.   With regard to inflation, my outlook is unchanged from our last meeting.  I continue to expect that core inflation will be flat to down a bit in 201011 but then move up to about 1 percent by 2012. As I discussed at length last time, substantial resource slack remains, and I suppose we will talk more about that at the December meeting, as I understand that agenda.  Inflation expectations, as best I can judge, appear to be stable.  Longer-dated measures of expectations derived from surveys, SPF forecasts for the TIPS market continue to run in their typical ranges, and the stability of these measures stands in contrast to strong countervailing forces. For me, the risk of an outsized medium-term increase in inflation seems small, especially an increase that threatens price stability.  After all, core inflation is running currently well below my 2 percent guideline for price stability, and the medium-term prospects are for more of the same.  Of course, we will need to listen intently for changing fundamentals that may alter these risk assessments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have been encouraged by the positive tone of recent economic data and continued signs of healing in the financial system.  Improvements in 
the housing sector are particularly welcome because they contribute both to economic growth and to mitigating the strains on the financial system.  In the corporate bond market, risk spreads have come down, and that should support business investment for those corporations with access to market financing.   However, these encouraging signs are marred by the persistently weak labor market and stagnating wage income.  In addition, my business contacts, too, report that bank credit conditions remain tight, and most have reined in capital spending, limiting expenditures to essential projects and those that promise immediate efficiency improvements.  Finally, some of the recent strength in housing and auto purchases results from temporary government programs.  Overall, the recovery is shaping up as a long, difficult slog for several reasons, including the extraordinary depth of the recession, the pressure on financial firms and households to repair their balance sheets, and the zero bounds considerable constraint on monetary policy. I find myself in agreement with the Greenbooks assessment of the outlook for the economy, but this is not an outcome that I find at all satisfactory, not with unemployment rising to 10 percent this year and remaining above 8 percent through 2011 and inflation below desired levels as far as the eye can see.  That said, the most frightening downside risks to this forecast have receded, and I now view the risks to the outlook as roughly balanced.  Nevertheless, those risks are considerable.  On the upside, it is possible that consumers and businesses may be better able and more willing to spend than I have given them credit for.  Over the past several months, we have seen improvements in a number of factors that pulled down consumer spending over the past year.  These include uncertainty, consumer confidence, wealth, and credit availability.  My staff has 
estimated consumption-forecasting models that include these variables, and their preferred 
specification generates a forecast for PCE growth over the next four quarters of around 5 percent due to the improvement in those factors.  Because the model misses other forces that are restraining consumer spending, I havent adjusted my own baseline forecast up to nearly this extent, but this analysis does highlight for me a potential upside risk to the outlook similar to the V-shaped recovery discussed in the Greenbook. Counterbalancing this upside risk are some significant downside risks.  Some of the most worrisome ones also relate to consumer spending. In particular, the still-parlous state of household balance sheets could restrain consumption more than is incorporated in the Greenbook. In the past, I have highlighted the potential drag on consumer spending that we may see if households, to rebuild wealth and reduce leverage, boost their saving beyond the rather modest rebound incorporated in the Greenbook forecast.  The United States was one of many countries to experience a massive increase in debt-to-income ratios followed by a severe housing bust and a retrenchment in consumption.  Interestingly, cross-country evidence reveals a remarkably strong correlation between the increase of debt to income before the crisis and the decline in real consumption once the crisis began.  I recognize that correlation does not necessarily imply causation, but this evidence provides a cautionary note that we may see abnormally low consumer spending for some time. Another downside risk relates to the effect on the banking sector of further deterioration in the commercial real estate market.  As many of you have mentioned, the prospects for commercial real estate have continued to deteriorate.  We estimate that a significant share of banks in our District will fail over the next five years as a consequence.  In fact, we are 
concerned that we now have a large number of already economically insolvent zombie banks whose troubles may have seriously impaired their ability to extend credit to the businesses in 
  their communities.  In addition, lenders are commonly asking borrowers either to repay loans or to provide more equity to offset the erosion of real estate values.  And given the very weak conditions in commercial real estate, this situation sets the stage for further increases in delinquencies and foreclosures. This process could generate an adverse feedback loop akin to that associated with residential real estate. So in summary, the economic outlook remains very uncertain, but I think the tail risks and their associated costs have receded to the point that the risks for growth are now balanced. Turning to inflation, the basic story has not changed much since our last meeting.  I expect substantial slack in labor and goods markets to reduce core PCE price inflation from about 1 percent this year to 1 percent in 2010 and 2011.  The risks to this forecast are roughly balanced as well, but I am very concerned by the sharp deceleration we have seen in wages over the past year, and that is a development that is echoed by comments from my directors.  They report that wages are flat or even slightly down, with no increases in sight. Against this backdrop of substantial slack, a key factor putting a floor on the decline in the inflation rate is the publics confidence that we will do whatever it takes to bring the economy back from recession and keep inflation from falling too low.  If we waiver from that pledge and tighten too soon, confidence in our commitment to economic recovery and price stability could be undermined, and that could be a recipe for an extended episode of disinflation or even deflation like the one Japan suffered through.  A commitment to low and stable inflation involves defending the inflation objective on both the upside and the downside.   A concern in this regard is the fact that implied forward rates from fed funds futures contracts now suggest that market participants expect us to start raising rates as early as next spring. This assessment, however, depends critically on the assumption that term premiums and 
       fed funds futures contracts are very low by historical standardsabout 1 basis point per month.  This assumption seems questionable, given evidence that historically these term premiums appear to have varied considerably, and estimated risks and term premiums on a wide range of assets are now quite elevated. My staff just recently completed the development of a new model of the term structure of Treasury yields and has used it to back out estimates of expected future short rates and the term premium on fed funds futures.  They find that the term premium on fed funds futures has risen substantially and is currently much higher than 1 basis point per month.  The implication, in contrast to the usual interpretation from futures, is that market participants currently expect a relatively shallow path for the funds rate similar to that in the Desks primary dealer survey.  These expectations exceed but are closer to my own views concerning the appropriate course of policy given what we now know. Of course, our policy decisions must depend on how economic developments actually unfold.  But if we signal a tightening of policy before it is justified by the evolution of inflation and economic slack in the economy, perhaps partly out of concern that market participants see us as getting behind the curve, we could upset confidence in our policies, cause longer-term rates to rise, and end up in a more dangerous deflationary situation. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. May I ask a question? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You said much more than 1 basis point.  Can you give me a rough order of magnitude? MS. YELLEN. I think the order of magnitude is about 3 or 4 basis points a month over the next year or two. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay. Thanks. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. We are halfway through our go-round. It is 5:45.  Maybe this is a good time to adjourn for today.  We will start tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. There is a reception up in the cafeteria, followed by dinner. [Meeting recessed] 
  November 4, 2009Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everyone.  Let me just start with a few items before we go into the rest of the go-round.  Just, first, one data point: The ADP employment number this morning was minus 203,000, which the stock market viewed as a decent number.  We have a small correction from yesterdays presentation.  Brian. MR. MADIGAN. Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Yesterday we reported that TALF loans declined 10 percent over the intermeeting period because of repayments of TALF loans.  That decline actually applied to TALF loans backed by ABS.  We want to note that the decline in TALF loans backed by ABS was offset by an increase in TALF loans backed by CMBS.  So, on balance, over the intermeeting period, TALF loans were flat. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. With your indulgence, also, as I said yesterday, we want to inquire to get the views of all members on some of the issues that were raised in the presentations yesterday. But I think there are a few noncontroversial items, and maybe we can just very quickly see if everybody is okay with them and just simplify the process.  So let me just try to get a little feedback quickly. The most number of issues were raised about the swap lines, and I think we need to have a full memorandum to you on those issues.  Obviously, there were questions both about how to define the line, how to deal with the North American counterparties, and so on.  So we will send you a memo on this and ask for a thoughtful response.  If there is no objection, though, I think the staff would appreciate it if they could continue their informal nonbinding talks with the four major central banks.  In any case, this is part of the process of winding down the existing lines.  If there is no objection. Okay.  That is the swap lines. 
  On the material relating to various lending programs, we mentioned that we plan to consider shortening the maximum maturity of primary credit loans to 28 days.  That would be announced soon and presumably be effective after year-end.  I didnt hear any commentary on that. Was anyone concerned about that?  Seeing nonethough if you do have any comments, by all means let us know in the next week or so. The other point that was raised was that the staff wanted input on publishing a Federal Register notice on the term deposits, which would ask for input on how to structure those term deposits. Of course, again, this is nonbinding. It is just for information.  I propose that we would circulate the proposed language to the Committee and ask for any feedback on that.  But we will move ahead with developing a notice and then circulating that for any concerns. Okay. Finally, on the other issues relating to the reverse repos and so onthe staff suggested prioritizing reverse repos and term deposits and putting RCAs, the collateralized accounts, on hold for the time being.  I didnt hear any objection to that.  Are there any concerns about that?  Let me say for myself that putting it on hold doesnt mean killing it.  I think we ought to maintain all of our options.  The RCAs are meant to address a specific issue that we had earlier, which was the GSEs and the problems that their excess liquidity might cause for us in managing the short-term interest rate.  But this is just a prioritization for the short term.  Any concerns?   Okay. And on the reverse repos, there was some discussion of who would be the counterparties. I think what we heard from this were a couple of things.  First, in order to get this going soon, we should probably prioritize the high-volume counterparties as the first step.  But, second, we should plan to include a broader set of counterparties, and we should be developing criteria for doing that.  Governor Warsh mentioned using the private sector as one 
    particular possibility that we should explore. Assuming that we are going to go forward with this today, which I believe we want to, we would want to continue our testing process.  I promised yesterday that we wouldnt make final decisions, so if anybody is uncomfortable with it or would just like to have more time, please say so.  Are those things okay? MR. EVANS. Mr. Chairman? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 
MR. EVANS. Just so I can understand this a little more clearly, where do the money market mutual funds enter into that prioritization?  That seems to be where a large pool of funds might come from. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think that they would be a high priority.  Those are the major sources of funding.  But I guess the question would be, Do we go first to the Fidelitys and so on?  At some point we should try to make sure that any money market mutual fund with an interest should have access either directly or indirectly.  But in the interest of monetary policy implementation in the very short run, we would start with the larger ones. MR. EVANS. I agree. Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. 
MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  Yes, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  So we are not going down this path; it is just testing still?  We are not making a commitment to any particular volume of reverse repurchases? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Absolutely not.  This is just making sure we have a working tool. MR. LACKER. Okay. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody okay? All right.  Thank you very much.  We are ready to continue where we left off on the go-round.  President Hoenig, I think that you are next. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Conditions in our District and my views on the outlook havent changed a lot since last time.  On the region, I think the operative words there are moderately improve, and you can kind of go through that.  We have seen our manufacturing moderately improve, driven by new orders and some orientation toward exports.  Actually, there has been some hiring in manufacturing, but that is mixed.  Of course, you get some hiring, and you get some layoffs.  So in a sense, that is pretty stable but not improving dramatically at all.  Housing has also improved.  How much that is related to the homebuyers credit is not clear, but we do see improvement.  Our big downside in the region is commercial real estate, and that is going to remain so for at least a couple of years, we think.  Our energy sector has also moderately improved, oil particularly.  Our natural gas, which is a big part of it, still has plenty of supply; depending on the season, that will be effective.  But one thing about the energy industry is that they have been very able, in terms of current independence, to renegotiate their lines; they have had no trouble getting those renewed.  Our labor markets, on balance, are still weak, but they are not declining, as indicated perhaps by this mornings numbers.  One other thing I would comment on. Our larger companies do have fairly sizable cash balances. For cap-ex, they are talking about maintaining and spending to maintain, but not expanding, at this point as well. On the national economy, our outlook for GDP is not unlike that of the Greenbook.  We have a little more modest growth in 2010, and then it picks up.  We also have an assumption in there where policy is less accommodating sooner.  Still, we see modest growth going forward 
    and, in that environment, a very modest pickup in inflation over the next couple of years.  And other than that, things are stable, moving forward, and I will leave it at that for now.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I am pleased by the output gains that the economy posted last quarter, I do remain concerned about how the economy will develop over the coming year.  So in preparation for this meeting, I focused my discussions with my business contacts on the question, How sustainable are the third-quarter growth figures? Despite many signs that housing prices and sales of existing homes are stabilizing, home builders in my District are still largely anticipating a bleak outlook for 2010.  They noted that their interest costs for holding land continue to rise, even while the value of that land has sagged.  Small builders reported that the increase in housing starts that we saw in the third quarter is due in large part to the fact that big builders are working off land inventories and then selling their homes at fire-sale prices.  These smaller builders do not see the gains that we saw in housing starts as sustainable. The commercial real estate developers, realtors, and investors fundamentally view their circumstances as dire, and they see a lot more pain ahead.  I am not expecting commercial construction to add to GDP next year, but beyond that it is going to take a lot of skill by many people to resolve the commercial real estate problems in an orderly way.  The problems in the commercial real estate sector add another dimension of uncertainty to my outlook. Although consumption figures picked up notably in the third quarter, many of my contacts stressed the continuing effects of weakened household balance sheets on consumer spending. A national apparel and personal care retailer confirmed this perspective by noting that households are turning from credit cards to debit cards to rein in their spending.   
An auto insurer in my District reported that households are registering and insuring fewer automobiles as households try to reduce their expenses.  The insurer also reported that more customers stopped making payments after they received confirmation of having insurance or proof of insurance. Demands for these services are lower, but this insurer emphasized that the patterns that he is seeing reflect general ongoing stress that is evident in household balance sheets. The progress that is evident in consumer spending in the third quarter, seems unlikely to be sustained without notable progress on employment. I think that reports like these make it hard to extrapolate forward the full strength in the third-quarter growth rate.  So while my forecast has good growth in the third quarter, which I think was aided by many government interventions, my expectations for the fourth quarter and for next year are for less growth than is in the Greenbook projection.  In my outlook, the recovery does not build momentum until the second half of 2010.  The restraints on economic growth in my projections stem primarily from the continued weakness in both residential and commercial construction and a slow recovery in consumer spending.  Despite the weaker output path that I have in my projection, my unemployment rate does look very close to the Greenbooks. My projection for inflation hasnt changed materially in response to the recent good news in output. Core inflation rates continue to sag despite stable inflation expectations.  The median CPI has declined over the past several months, which points to the influence that the economic slack is having on current pricing.  I appreciate that others correctly point out that output gaps have not always been reliable in forecasting inflation.  But the compensation data show plenty of evidence that economic slack is currently affecting our economy.  Indeed, based on the rate of productivity growth that I expect we will see posted for the third quarter, it seems that unit labor 
costs have fallen sharply.  Fortunately, inflation expectations havent declined, which helped to prevent some of the downward pressure that we are seeing from converting into sharper deflation in consumer prices.  Still, my outlook for core PCE inflation is that it will dip below 1.5 percent in 2010 and only gradually increase toward 2 percent in 2011.  In sum, I view the risks around my outlook as balanced.  The risks to my outlook for inflation remain balanced because I think that shifting inflation expectations could go in either direction.  Even if we have seen stable inflation expectations to date, we could, as President Bullard pointed out in his memo, experience an expectation shock in this highly unusual economic environment. On output growth, I have shifted my balance of risks from downside to balanced.  I still harbor the concern that the momentum we are currently seeing may fade more quickly than I currently have in my outlook.  But the strength in the third-quarter data also shows that surprises 
to the upside are possible. Notably, export growth has been a surprise in the third quarter, and 
stronger world growth, as Nathan pointed out yesterday, would boost my outlook considerably.  And as the Greenbook points out, we just dont have a lot of experience with systemic financial 
shocks, and perhaps the economy will prove to be more resilient to these shocks next year than I currently expect. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to begin by thanking the Chairman for his generous introduction yesterday.  It is an incredible honor to be a participant in this discussion, and I am looking forward to working with all of you, both today and in the 
meetings to come. In the Ninth District, real economic activity is stable but subdued.  Unemployment did fall considerably in Minnesota from August to September, from 8 percent to 7.3 percent, and 
 Minnesota has a majority of the population in the Ninth District.  However, unemployment remained elevated in the rest of the District, although I should say that unemployment has been low in the Ninth District relative to national averages elsewhere, except in the upper peninsula of Michigan. The information from our directors about their local communities is consistent with this mixed picture.  Our directors report that our consumers remain cautious about spending.  One reported that shipping was dormant in Duluth through much of the summer before picking up in late September, which, if you are familiar with Duluth, you know is very late in the shipping season for them.  The directors generally agreed that things had stopped getting worse, but they also agreed that they did not actually see them getting that much better. Nationally, an advance estimate of third-quarter GDP growth was better than expected at 3 percent.  This increase followed four quarters of negative growth.  As a consequence, output is well below its trend levels, if we assume that trend grows at 3 percent per year beginning in the fourth quarter of 2007. Of course, 2007 represents a peak, so you may not want to draw your trend line from that point.  Given that, it is worth noting that output remains well below a 
3 percent trend line that begins at the end of the 200001 recession.  The Greenbook predicts that GDP will rise 3.9 percent per year over the next two years.  Based on our Minneapolis models forecast, I believe that prediction is optimistic, if anything.  But even if it were right, GDP will be well below this 200001 trend line of 3 percent through the end of 2011.  Of course, it is an important question whether this discrepancy is attributable to a fall in the efficient level of output or to the effect of price and wage rigidities.  I will leave that question open.  Unemployment has stabilized in the past three months.  However, it remains extremely high by historical standards 
at nearly 10 percent. I agree with the Greenbook that it will remain elevated through 2011.  The employmentpopulation ratio remains at a 25-year low. There is good news. Inflation remains low.  Inflation expectations, as measured by Blue Chip forecasts or TIPS spreads, also remain low.  However, I am concerned about a tail risk in inflation. The size of government debt held in the private sector has increased over 30 percent in the past two years.  There is a positive probability that fiscal imbalances of this kind will give rise to significant inflationary pressures.  The news is also good in financial markets.  Spreads in the interbank lending market have tightened considerably.  The spread between jumbo mortgage loans and conforming mortgage loans remains elevated but has fallen sharply since the first part of the year. House prices are stabilizing and, if you believe the CaseShiller numbers, may actually be rising in much of the country.  So, overall, I would say the real side of the economy is recovering somewhat.  The trend in GDP is well below historical norms, unemployment is well above historical norms, and this characterization seems likely to continue well into 2011.  Inflation is under control and is expected to remain so, although the size of the government debt remains a possible large risk.  Financial markets continue to improve, and I see them as being much stronger than a year ago.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Im sorry, I dont want to put you on the spot, but I was just interested in your view on the relationship of government debt to inflation.  Do you take the fiscal theory of the price level as related here? Monetization? Excess demand?  I was just curious. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Basically, when you have large government debt, as you know, there are going to be two ways to pay it off.  There is a third way, which is not to pay it 
 off. [Laughter] But lets keep to the two ways of paying it off.  One is to pay it off by real tax collections, and the other way is to monetize. I think private markets will be concerned about whether or not we will be monetizing, and that will influence inflation expectations and the realization of inflation. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you.  The economy appears to be evolving very close to what we expected. Real GDP is expanding at a moderate rate, but some of the supportive elements, such as the swing in the inventory cycle and special programs like cashfor-clunkers and the first-time homebuyer tax credit, are temporary and thus may exaggerate the underlying strength of the economy.  At the same time, potential retardants, such as the decline in household net worth, the high level of household indebtedness, and the constraints on credit availability, do not appear to have subsided since the last meeting.  Financial conditions, broadly defined, have not changed significantly either.  Generally, I would think as the economy improves that we would actually expect to see an easing of financial conditions.  So the fact that that hasnt happened over the intermeeting period is slightly disturbing. The inflation outlook has not changed materially either.  The core PCE deflator has risen only 1.3 percent over the past year, down more than a percentage point from a year ago.  Moreover, cost pressures are very subdued, with the employment cost index for civilian workers rising only 1 percent over the past four quarters.  And the high unemployment rate implies to me that these wage pressures are likely to be muted for a long time.  Modest growth in compensation per hour, combined with the spike in productivity growth, means that unit labor costs are falling quite rapidly. Thus, I think we are where we were at the last FOMC meeting many quarters away from any need to tighten monetary policy. 
   That said, we should recognize that we are already tightening on at least two dimensions.  First, a number of government support programs are ending, and we are tightening the terms of our liquidity programs.  Second, the Treasury purchase program has been completed, and the agency debt and agency MBS purchases are on track to taper off by the end of the first quarter.  That underscores the need for caution at this moment. With respect to the agency MBS purchase program, I am where Brian Sack is on this.  I expect that the option-adjusted spread will widen somewhat going forward.  It is difficult to sort out the timing of this widening because it depends on the relative weight one assigns to stock versus flow effects. But I suspect that traders will view the current spread level as unsustainable, causing them to go short agency MBS or short to spread, which would be long Treasuries and short agency MBS, on an anticipation of a backup in the yield or spread with the end of the program.  I am not sure when this process will start, but I would not be surprised at all if we did not see some widening in the spread by our January meeting.  Of course, if that happens, that is likely to lead to somewhat higher mortgage rates, and that will inhibit the nations housing recovery. A few comments on President Bullards note on output gaps.  First, I think it is great that he is writing memos like that and circulating them to the rest of the Committee.  I think it is really important to understand where we agree and where we differ, and I think these memos help to sharpen that point. That said, I do find it unconvincing that the output gap, after the 1981-82 recession, could be less than 1 percentage point, as shown in figure 4 of his memo.  Theoretical models maybe can generate that result, but that makes me doubt the theoretical models, not take that figure in hand.  It would imply that the NAIRU moved virtually hand in hand with the rise in the actual unemployment rate, and I think that is quite unlikely. 
 Second, I continue to be disturbed, in President Bullards framework, about, What is the true underlying model?  What drives short- and medium-term inflation expectations? When you commented yesterday, you said its the Feds credibility, but then what drives the Feds credibility?  And how do we close the model?  I certainly agree that inflation expectations are very important.  I think we all agree on that. But if those expectations depend in part on current and expected future output gaps, then you cant completely ignore the output gap. Third, in the memo President Bullard suggested that the housing bubble could be interpreted as a large upward deviation from the normal or potential level of output.  The idea is that real GDP overshoots potential during the boom by roughly the amount of the unsustainable output in housing.  I dont really understand that.  If housing was a bubble and we produced too much housing, this does not mean that potential output was much lower.  We could have produced things other than housing. We presumably had the capacity to move around resources, labor and capital, to do so. So the housing bubble, to my mind, did not materially change potential output, only the composition of actual output.  That is how I would look at it. Fourth, the behavior of core inflation measures following recessions is pretty compelling.  In the United States, on average, the core inflation rate has fallen about 2 percentage points during the first 18 months of an economic expansion.  If we take the worst-case cycle from our perspective of inflation, core inflation rose about  percentage point.  So there is a lot of variance cycle to cycle, but overall the evidence is pretty compelling that core inflation tends to fall during the early phases of economic expansions. In general, I think the empirical evidence for output gaps and inflation is less than decisive for some very obvious reasons.  One, we dont have many business cycles to study.  Yes, there are many years of data, but not many business cycles.  Second, we measure inflation 
   and output gaps poorly. And, third, there is oftentimes not much variability in our measures of core inflation and output gaps. That is certainly true of the last couple of cycles.  Thus, it is not surprising to me that it is hard to find a robust empirical relationship.  But that is different from saying that there isnt a relationship.  I am pretty confident now that inflation is low and the output gap is high. Thus, I expect the historical experience to hold; during early recovery periods, core inflation is more likely to fall than to rise.  Is that absolutely certain?  Of course not. We just dont have enough data to be absolutely confident.  And other factors that influence inflation expectations could derail such an outcome, but we have to go with what we know now.  If it turns out that this cycle starts to evolve very differently, then we will have to adjust in a timely manner. My perspective is simple.  The unemployment rate is very high; core inflation is low.  Given our dual mandate and the stability of long-term inflation expectations, this implies that our focus should be on getting the unemployment rate down and that this is likely to be our focus for an extended period. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data on economic activity seem consistent with not only an expanding economy but also one that will strengthen gradually with a slow decline in unemployment from very elevated levels.  So although my forecast has strengthened since June, it still has, as many of you have remarked, the same basic contour that it has had for some timePresident Fishers checkmark contour. I think the good news was that final demand, if anything, was a bit stronger than expected, reinforcing the impression that the upturn is underpinned by more than an inventory correction with consumption outside autos and orders for capital equipment moving higher.  But as I noted, there 
         are reasons for sticking with the outlook for only a gradual strengthening.  The surprise in consumption came at the expense of a sharper-than-expected fall in the saving rate, which does not seem sustainable or repeatable.  I agree with the staff forecast that the saving rate is likely to rise over coming quarters as households adjust to lower wealth, uncertain job prospects, and less available credit. Payrolls and initial claims suggest that the job market remains quite weak.  The effects of this on incomes and on confidence are likely to be felt for some time.  There is no evidence yet that other forms of spending are likely to expand rapidly enough to fill the gap left by lower levels of consumption out of income for some time.  The housing market looks better, but starts and permits have only leveled out, and vacancy rates remain quite high.  High vacancy rates and financial constraints will weigh on nonresidential construction for some time.  Restraint on the growth of consumption along with excess capacity will hold down accelerator effects on business investment.  And net exports were still a negative contributor to GDP in the third quarter despite the pickup in growth abroad. Financial market developments over the intermeeting period also continue to point to financial constraints on the increase in demand.  As Dave Stockton noted, a sustained improvement in financial marketsincluding the greater availability of bank credit, a further decline in credit-risk premiums, and a rise in equity pricesare important preconditions for even the gradual strengthening of demand in the Greenbook forecast.  Most especially, bank credit remains quite tight.  On the quantity side, bank lending continued to decline very rapidly, and growth in the monetary aggregates was modest.  A good deal of the drop in bank loans undoubtedly reflects demand weakness, but the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicated that banks continue to cut back on all kinds of credit lines, and they continue to tighten standards, albeit by a smaller plurality 
       than before.  And on the price side of bank credit, a considerable margin of banks reported a further tightening of spreads on business loans.  Many banks continue to struggle with loan losses, and it will take some time before they rebuild capital and become more comfortable increasing the supply of credit. In securities markets, the pace of improvement slowed amid questions about the strength of the recovery.  The decline in equity prices in the past two weeks, as well as the small rebound in the dollar and a decline in some commodity prices, suggests to me a healthy appreciation of the likely gradual pickup in the economy and the risks around it.  But it also implies a slowing in the financial market impetus to recovery.   Although Im at the upper end of the central tendency on growth, I find myself at the lower end of the central tendencies on inflation.  I had core inflation drifting down further over the next two years to 1 percent, reflecting the effects of a lot of slack in utilization of capital and labor resources.  Like everyone else, Im looking forward to the discussion in December.  I agree that slack and output gaps are hard to measure.  Potential supply could be and probably is being held down by some of the frictions associated with the required reallocation of capital and labor resources as construction, financial, and consumer goods and services sectors shrink, while net exports and business investments slowly fill the gap.  And financial constraints might inhibit the ability of small businessesin particular, in sectors that are benefiting from shifts in demandfrom expanding plant and staffing.  But the surprising strength in productivity suggests that firms are able to do more with less, and that provides a countervailing boost to potential GDP. Data on core inflation over the intermeeting period continued to come in quite damped, and we have experienced a percentage point or more of core disinflation over the past year, while all of these adverse influences on potential supply were already in play.  As a number of you have 
    remarked, the growth in labor compensation is decelerating quite remarkably.  All of this has occurred while inflation expectations have been very well anchored.  Stable expectations will mute the effect of slack, will flatten the Phillips curve, but something has been pressuring inflation lower while expectations have been stable, and I infer that it is primarily a large margin of slackof excess supply.  Furthermore, I confess to being one of the two people who saw the balance of risks around my inflation forecast as tilted to the downside.  If energy prices follow the futures market path, actual inflation will be quite low for a long time, and expectations could become unanchored but on the downside. I recognize that there are upside risks on the inflation forecast as well.  To my mind, they are primarily around a feedback loop from the dollar to commodity prices to headline inflation to 
inflation expectations.  Some decline in the dollar is a necessary part of the rebalancing of global demand.  We need some expenditure-shifting to get that rebalancing, although it would be preferable if the rising currencies were among the surplus countries of Asia.  And commodity prices should rise some as the global economy recuperates, especially with the recovery led by resource-using economies of Asia.  But the risk is that a loss of confidence in the dollar and its purchasing power becomes self-reinforcing feedback on inflation expectations.  We do not see this yet.  I dont expect it in response to moderate declines in the dollar and the rise in raw materials prices, but it is a risk that we will need to be especially attentive to.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.   MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said when we last met, I expected more strength in the next couple of quarters than in the next couple of years, and I still believe that.  Im skeptical of linear improvements that are outlined in the Greenbook in a world that looks as though it is filled with all sorts of nonlinear risks.  The extraordinary stimulus from public authorities 
        fiscal, monetary, and otherand the even more extraordinary run in financial markets have substantially improved the likely arithmetic of GDP in the next couple of quarters.  But if we dont see more-impressive signs of improved income and jobs and more impressive signs of business fixed investmentparticularly now when market-induced stimulus, government-induced stimulus, and a cyclical improvement in the economy are peakingthen I have to admit to being more cautious about growth prospects in the second half of 2010 and in 2011. Let me spend a little time on the real economy and then turn to financial markets and financial institutions and maybe a last word on inflation.  On the real economy, obviously, as many of you have discussed, the data are mixed but trending toward recovering, but it still looks like a subpar recovery.  I continue to think that we should be seeing more-substantial improvement sooner in order to get more comfortable that we have a durable recovery at hand.  I am not as persuaded as the Greenbook forecast suggests that the handoff from the public sector to the private sector will happen as seamlessly or as steadily as predicted.  Now, there is certainly plenty of good news that we can talk about.  The Fortune 500 nonfinancials are in great shape:  strong balance sheets; better position coming out of this recession than in the last two, for certain; highly productive, significant operating leverage; and still awaiting top-line growth, and if it comes, that would have a huge impact on their willingness to invest. The ISM and other surveys show manufacturing improving with inventories rebuilding.  But on the other side, real incomes are still declining even as PCE was bolstered by car and housing subsidies. The job engine to me looks stalled or maybe worse, and global trade appears to me still years away from reaching its prior peak.  And we are still seeing constrained credit availability to small businesses and households, as Governor Kohn talked about, and little impetus for increases in business fixed investment.   
        It is normally the case that improvements in share prices drive CEOs to be much more forward leaning on cap-ex than they appear to be at the present time.  And now when I talk about financial markets, I would suggest that the Greenbook supposition, which I think is rightwhich is that further improvements in the real economy are contingent on further improvements in financial marketslooks to me to be anything but a sure bet.  I think the schizophrenia that we have seen in the markets, particularly in the last couple of weeks, with preoccupation with one issue one day and with another issue the next day reminds us that the revaluation process of every asset everywhere in the world is still incomplete.  I try not to over-read or under-read what financial markets have been telling us in the last couple of weeks.  One over-read of this new move down in markets and increased volatility is that, Oh, you know, the markets got ahead of themselves and there is a big correction in front of us.  To under-read it would say, Well, markets go up and markets go down, and theres not much to worry about. My own sense is that were probably in a new phase in financial market developments.  Financial market improvements from here will be more driven by policy and by economic fundamentals and less driven by the kind of asset reallocations that weve seen and the catching-up by active investors who are trying to catch up with indexes. The one-way upward move by financial markets from March lows in all likelihood looks substantially complete both in the United States and elsewhere.  It is hard to predict where these markets will go, but I would suggest that real economic fundamentals and the contour of public policies will probably knock these markets around for a while, and so I am hesitant to suggest that the next several months will look as satisfying as the last several months in these markets. At the time of the last FOMC, I said that markets were nondistinguishingthey were willing to fund virtually all issuers throughout the worldthat the openness in these markets was 
     remarkable, and that those issuers that took advantage would be quite fortunate.  I said that others will regret standing on the sidelines.  From the March lows until the last FOMC meeting, we saw a $4 trillion increase in the value of publicly traded U.S. assets.  That is of significant consequence to the real economy and could help and is helping offset weak incomes.  I think the next $4 trillion will be a lot harder to come by. We can no longer count on the melting-up in these markets to do the hard work of helping repair balance sheets of financial institutions and households.  Still, in all likelihood in this move up, the first $4 trillion is likely to stick around for a while.  So I dont want to suggest that were not going to get ongoing benefits, but I do think that the financial market trajectory is likely to get tougher. I am a little disappointed that this move in these asset prices hasnt done more to help the real economy get back on its front foot.  Im a little disappointed that it hasnt helped durable final demand.  And I think the fourth-quarter data will be very instructive.  If the fourth-quarter GDP arithmetic still shows an incredible reliance on government-induced stimulus, even after this rally, then again, I hesitate about how optimistic to be on projections in the outyears. The haves and have-nots in financial markets are likely to be more obvious in the weeks and months ahead.  As Brian Sack said in his introduction, this change in market sentiment, this retrenchment, is probably healthy for the long term; but the increasing gloss of asset values will wear thin, and broken business models and underachievement by many firms may be met with a skeptical, even punitive, eye by market participants.  And we are likely to see a change in correlation among asset prices that was confounding many of us when we last met. Let me turn finally to financial institutions and then a brief word on inflation.  The global financial architecture remains unclear.  Impediments to financial institutions getting back to the business of banking are meaningful.  What we are seeing in some parts of the world, particularly 
       Europe and the United Kingdom, are discussions both at the behest of governments and in some cases at the behest of shareholders to decide whether some of these large financial institutions should be broken up.  In the United States, neither markets nor most government actors are demanding resizing or rescoping of large financial institutions.  But as we approach an even-numbered year, an election year in Washington, I will be surprised if there isnt more scrutiny around that deconglomeration hypothesis.  In the near term, equity and credit markets are likely to be more distinguishing, as I mentioned, and there is great interest in providing capital to these financial institutions so long as the capital is in the last round.  The success of U.S. banks in funding themselves is really about convincing markets that this is the last equity raise theyll need to do, and the extent to which they can pull that off or not strikes me as more challenging than it was six weeks ago. On the inflation front, the weakness on the real side of the economy is certainly driving wages down, is certainly having an impact on what were seeing from our inflation readings, both recent and going forward.  This change in wageprice levels, however, may be partially offset by relatively higher import prices, including year-over-year increases in energy and other commodities.  I think we have a natural experiment that is likely to confront us in the upcoming couple of quarters, and it will be important to gauge whether changes in headline prices due in part to rises in energy and other commodity costs at a time of large central bank balances, at a time of an unsustainable fiscal picture, and at a time of debt limit discussions that are likely to preoccupy the floor of the U.S. Senate, whether all of that in a natural experiment finds its way into core prices or affects broader measures of inflation expectations.  So I think we might have a good look on whether headline prices somehow converge to core or whether core drifts toward headline.  I think that will be an 
   interesting point of contact for us to think about the risks to the inflation outlook going forward.  Thank you.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke. MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  None of the bankers that I talked with were particularly optimistic, but as I went back and looked at all of the responses together, I was actually a bit more optimistic. [Laughter]  Buried in these bleak third-quarter earnings were actually a couple of positives. The margins are higher because of lower deposit rates and better loan spreads, theyre earning record mortgage-loan originations, and expense-reduction efforts are beginning to pay off. All of these positives are being offset by high credit costs and reserve levels that are overshadowing their positive nature.  They describe their credit cost as approaching a plateau rather than a peak. Auto loans are actually looking quite a bit stronger.  Credit card losses are stabilizing but will remain at high levels.  They believe they are three to six months away from a slowdown in new mortgage and home equity delinquencies with four to six months after that to begin actually working the levels down.  But they are cautiously optimistic that the ultimate losses will not be as high as the more stressed scenarios had indicated, and most of the built-in nonaccruals are now coming from income-producing real estate, which take longer to work out but tend to have less severity of loss. The residential real estate market is actually showing real signs of firming.  Inventories are in better shape, approaching the six-month level, which indicates balance, the existing home inventories at 7 months supply, and new home inventories at 7 months.  Supplies are probably even more sharply stratified by price point.  One bank had looked at it in its market.  Houses over $1 million had a 5-year supply; from $500,000 to $1 million, a 30-month supply; and under 
      $500,000, a 5-month supply.  And while the price points will be different in different markets, I think the fundamentals are conceptually the same. Property is moving when it comes into OREO.  Current buyers are both investors and owneroccupiers with an estimate of first-time homebuyers making up about 20 percent. The investors who are buying judge the bottom of the market by time on the market, number of offers, and the sales price to the asking price, and all of these are currently signaling a bottom. I heard some complaints when I was in California that the banks were taking cash offers at less than offers from owneroccupiers who needed financing.  One large servicer said that loan investors did originally have a preference for cash offers because of concerns about the loans closing; but this is changing, and now theyre looking for the best offer.   The Greenbook forecast for house prices includes more price softening in anticipation of a spike in foreclosure inventories, but there is at least the possibility that we wont see a spike, just a steady supply.  The pace of foreclosure activity actually varies by firms, given their modification strategies and their capabilities.  It also varies based on the foreclosure laws in various geographies, with judicial foreclosure states lagging, and it varies based on market.  Some of the hardest-hit markets are actually seeing the most firming, with Florida being the clear outlier and likely to be a black hole for some time to come. Even residential construction is improving.  The large regionals have worked their balances down 70 to 80 percent.  Properties that had no buyers before are now moving.  There are some reports of better pricing and other reports of stable pricing but more buyers.  And whereas the last time there were a couple of reports of lot sales, now there are widespread reports of lot sales for entry-level product. 
          The income-producing property front is still deteriorating, with a notable recent deterioration in multifamily.  They expect higher nonperformers but lower loss severity and point out that, when you have cash flow, you at least have options for workout.  Also, the distress is due to economic fundamentals rather than overbuilding.  The new CRE guidance will help, but in my opinion it does not go far enough.  The classification analysis does start with determination of debt-service capability rather than collateral value; requires a write-down of the loan to the collateral value less selling expenses whenever the debt service is insufficient, but only when it is insufficient; and recognizes that cash flow from income-producing properties might fully support some portion of the loan.  But it permits the portion to be graded as a pass only if the bank has formally restructured the loan into two parts, a good loan and a bad loan.  I believe that banks would be more willing to make new loans and renew or extend existing loans if the classification system were driven by underlying economics rather than the contractual terms of the loans. I asked all the banks about their excess reserve positions.  All were net positive cash, and most were happy with the current level and proud of their efforts to get there.  When asked what actions they might take if they wanted to reduce the position, they said that they would bid less for deposits, and several would reduce public funds.  Some would buy agency and agency MBS, although several expressed concern about what happens when we exit, and none would grow loans.  Several expressed uncertainty about the level of demand deposits when the FDIC unlimited guaranty expires, and most are intentionally shrinking the bank in the face of uncertainty about capital. Capital is available, but expensive, with larger banks generally available, midsize banks on and off, and small banks very difficult.  One bank had raised part of the money needed for TARP repayment and elected to keep the rest of their TARP funds rather than take the extreme level of 
      dilution it would require to fully repay.  They are uncertain about what future capital requirements might look like and uncertain about what will be likely to count as capital. And while they are concerned about credit risk, their willingness to make new loans is driven at least in part by regulatory considerations.  Theyll take only pristine credits, customers that they want for the long term, not solving immediate problems.  Theyre looking for relationships, and theyre particularly concerned about examiner downgrades.  You could have an argument about whether the examiners are being overly tough or the bankers are being overly optimistic, but there does appear to be a disconnect in their view of the appropriate loan grades.  In the SNC portfolio, the staff reported that the banks and examiners generally identified the same loans as having weaknesses, but the examiners graded those loans lower than the banks.  The investment banks had much higher downgrades, with the examiners feeling that they could estimate credit agency ratings much more accurately than exam ratings. Faced with the new credit card law, they had a sharp decline in solicitations.  The go to rate on new solicitations is 300 basis points in relation to prime, higher than it was before the new law, although the reduction in available credit may be misleading.  One bank insisted that most were inactive cards.  Smaller banks are concerned about the new HOEPA rules, with 6 percent now a high-priced loan, which means they cant do balloon payments and they have no capability of escrowing taxes and insurance.  So they are reporting that theyre going to have to quit making those loans.  In summary, we could see improvement in loan performance next year, but we are a very long way off from a recovery in bank lending.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, let me say that Ill be brief.  Second, let me say that I mean it.  [Laughter]  I think little has changed on net since our last meeting, and this 
          unremarkable story strikes me as itself unremarkable because the outlook for moderate growth in the next few quarters has been relatively clear for a while.  As to the second half of 2010 and beyond, though, while the forecast of modestly to moderately above-trend growth remains eminently plausible, there is considerable uncertainty.  Factors such as the waning of stimulus effects, the continued drag on consumption engendered by high unemployment, and the travails of the commercial real estate market could well lead to a more sluggish pace of growth.  On the other hand, as Ive said at each of the last couple of meetings, despite these significant downside risks, I dont discount entirely the possibility of a more rapid pace of recovery. Turning to price stability, the story is similar:  substantial clarity for the near-to-medium term with low levels of inflation and then more uncertainty thereafter.  I have my doubts that an unwelcome level of inflation could take hold in the absence of either a rapid acceleration in job growth that got us at least within shouting distance of full employment or a big, exogenous shock in the form of much higher commodity prices.  But I acknowledge that the unusual characteristics of a recession following a financial crisis and the consequent policy responses may make past experience less than dispositive.  And I would add that I am less convinced than I would like to be that recent exchange rate developments are wholly benign.  I think they bear watching. To conclude by referring to our statutory dual mandate, maximum employment is not remotely in sight.  Concerns about deflation have substantially receded, though they have not disappeared entirely.  Concerns about inflation seem at this point to be based more on anticipation than on observation.  But Im happy to join others in continuing to keep watch.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, and thanks to everybody for their valuable input.  Let me make an effort to summarize the discussions I heard at least, and then Ill make a few additional comments. Participants noted the recent, more-positive economic data.  After four quarters of decline, we have seen positive economic growth again, as had been anticipated, and moderate GDP growth should continue in the fourth quarter.  Factors contributing to growth in the near term include the ongoing slowdown in the pace of inventory decumulation, fiscal actions to support autos and housing, and some signs of life in consumer spending. However, as many one-off factors affected final demand in the third quarter, it is difficult to separate the signal from the noise, leaving considerable uncertainty about the strength of the recovery going forward.  Most participants see the economy growing at a moderate pace in 2010, a pace that would imply a very slow decline in unemployment.  Risks to the economic growth outlook are roughly balanced, with conditions in financial and labor markets posing threats to growth but the possibility of a stronger consumer and strong productivity growth creating upside risks.  Concerns remain about the dependence of the economy on government support and the ability of the economy to deliver a self-sustaining recovery without that support.  One participant characterized the likely recovery as a long slog, and one thought of it as a checkmark, which we will continue to evaluate.  The emerging global recovery, especially in emerging markets, is supportive of economic growth here. With respect to inflation, the risks seem roughly balanced as well, with some arguing that slack will lead to declining core inflation and others noting that rising energy prices, policy expectations, and inflation expectations that may not be as anchored as we would like are upside risks. Some saw slower inflation in the near term but upside risks further out.  Consumer spending 
      is modestly stronger, even outside autos.  However, weak labor markets, the poor condition of household balance sheets, declines in net worth, and tight credit are drags on sentiment and the ability to spend. Labor income is flat as hours decline and wage growth slows.  How the saving rate will evolve is difficult to anticipate, but further declines in the saving rate from here do seem unlikely. Housing activity has improved, and house prices have risen modestly in some areas.  Inventories of housing are down, and we may have seen a bottom.  However, factors such as the first-time homebuyer tax credit and Fed MBS purchases may be driving that trend to some extent.  Builders, especially smaller builders, remain pessimistic. Business owners generally remain quite cautious and continue to focus on cost savings in the absence of significant top-line revenue growth.  The resulting productivity gains have been impressive.  However, there is substantial reluctance to hire or invest, except possibly abroad, due to uncertainty about prospective demand and about Washingtons grape-shot approach to policy.  Continued strengths in parts of the global economy, notably Asia, have helped to increase exports supporting manufacturing, though net exports are not likely to be a large net contributor to GDP growth overall. The labor market remains very weak.  As noted, firms continue to look aggressively for cost savings and see little need to hire even if demand expands.  Small businesses, which are normally a source of employment growth in recoveries, have been hit especially hard by the credit crunch and weak demand. UI claims are falling, and job cuts are moderating, but both are still high.  The employment-to-population ratio is at a long-term low.  Firms will be able to increase hours to meet increases in demand, delaying the need to add to payrolls.  We must take account of the possibility of a jobless recovery. 
       Financial markets have shown signs of healing, with asset prices much higher than earlier this year and credit spreads much narrower.  More recently, though, the markets have moved sideways reflecting uncertainty about recovery, and continued improvement is not guaranteed.  Large firms with access to public markets are having little difficulty obtaining credit.  They also hold plenty of cash.  Smaller, bank-dependent firms are having a more difficult time, however.  The situation for banks is mixed.  Rising nonperforming loans will be a continuing source of stress, but there is some optimism about future credit losses, and profits and liquidity are both improved.  Poorly rated banks, in particular, are not lending but are trying to improve their capital ratios by shedding assets, and many participants cited commercial real estate as a major concern both for the banking system and for the broader economy.  Banks are also affected by policy uncertainty both here and abroad. Finally, on inflation, core inflation and median inflation are slowing, but headline inflation will be increased somewhat by price increases in energy, commodities, and imports.  Wages and unit labor costs have slowed, the latter reflecting sharp gains in productivity.  Firms report that they have no pricing power.  Participants continue to disagree on the appropriate weights to place on resource slack, inflation expectations, and other factors in forecasting inflation.  Substantial resource slack and slow wage growth may tend to push inflation down; on the other hand, inflation expectations may be less anchored and more disperse than they appear and could be vulnerable to the publics concerns about the extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy actions that have been taken or to disorderly declines in the dollar. Participants discussed the measurement of market expectations of monetary policy; the need to communicate exit plans and to exit at the appropriate time; the need to allow asset purchases and other aspects of policy to respond on the margin to changes in economic outlook; and the 
          determinants of inflation expectations and potential output.  Thats my summary.  Comments, reactions? All right. Let me make just a few additional comments here.  As everyone has noted, the intermeeting data were modestly encouraging.  We saw third-quarter economic growth, and we expect the fourth quarter to be positive as well.  Markets have become somewhat more uncertain, though, about the durability of the recovery and also perhaps about how this Committee will proceed. The issue remains for everyone, I think, what will happen after the end of this yearhow the recovery will look in 2010.  At the last meeting I described my outlook as muddled, and I remain firmly in that position. [Laughter]  If pressed, however, I would acknowledge that I feel somewhat more concerned about 2010, although I did make my balance of risks balanced.  As many of you have noted, the behavior of the consumer is very important, and I guess the good news, at least from a cyclical point of view, is that the Greenbook seems right so far that were not seeing a major increase in the household saving rate that would be, at least in the short term, a problem for the recovery. However, I do think there are some significant downside risks to that scenario, particularly in the labor market and the banking sector, and let me just talk about those a bit.  As Governor Kohn mentioned, the saving rate actually is quite low, given many of the fundamentals, and it seems very possible that it may rise if the labor market remains as weak as it appears.  I would like to discuss the labor market briefly because I think we really need to focus on the labor market as one of the key elements of the recovery. My sense is that, even given the bad headline numbers in terms of unemployment and payrolls, the labor market may be even weaker than it looks.  For example, insured unemployment 
        on regular state programs, the UI claims we check every Thursday morning, have peaked and come down significantly, and the outstanding stock of people on unemployment insurance is down to about six million.  But when you look at UI claims plus regular UI plus extended and emergency benefits, the number is ten million and has not peaked.  It is still very, very high.  Recently the BLS announced benchmark revisions that will lower the level of employment by another 850,000 jobs.  So joblessness, employment-to-population ratios, and so on are extraordinarily high.  Moreover, that joblessness has a very large component of permanent separations and long-term unemployment.  As weve seen in the last two recessionslooking at JOLTS data, for examplehiring rates are particularly weak, particularly contributing to the unemployment rate and the duration of unemployment, which is not encouraging as we look forward to the possibility of a jobless recovery. Just note that different demographic groups are reacting differently to the very poor state of the labor market.  Prime age males who have high attachment to the labor force have not dropped out of the labor force, but their unemployment rate has jumped much more significantly than that for the labor force as a whole.  On the other hand, younger workers under age 24 have been dropping out of the labor force, and participation rates there are considerably down.  So my first general point is just that the weakness is perhaps even worse and more pervasive than the unemployment rate may suggest. Second, looking forward, theres not much indication of increased hiring, at least in the medium term.  You can see that in anecdotes we heard today.  You can see that in surveys, and I think there is the point that others have made, but is worth mentioning again, that, despite all the cuts, despite the cost savings, firms have quite a bit of capacity to increase labor input without adding full-time workers, including calling back workers on furlough, adding hours to part-time 
     workers, increasing work weeks and adding overtime, and adding temporary workers, which adds to the number of people employed but not obviously to longer-term employment. A third point is that jobless recoveries almost by definition involve high productivity growth rates, and all of the indications so far suggest that, in fact, employers are finding those cost savings, which of course is good for the long term but again is a negative for future employment. Then the fourth and final point I want to make about the labor market is that we need to think about the interaction between the labor market and the credit markets.  There is a tremendous contraction going on in bank lending.  Nominal C&I bank loans outstanding are down about 12 percent, or $200 billion, over the past three quarters, and although we have seen some improvement in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, we still have net tightening in that area.  As people have noted, for large firms the bank lending contraction may not be such a big problem.  They have access to the public markets, and they have lots of cash.  But for small firms, I think it is a serious problem, as many of you have heard from your constituents.  Not only are bank lending and bank credit lines for small firms highly restricted, but in addition, you have the greatly reduced availability of home equity lines and credit card lines, which are important for very small businesses as a source of credit.  As a result of this, the small business hiring plans as reported by the NFIB are sharply below the troughs of 1990 and 2001 and have not improved at all from the worst levels of earlier this year. Now, there is an ongoing debate on the importance of small business in job creation.  There are some exaggerated numbers out there that are often used in political discourse.  The net creation of jobs by small businesses is much less than the gross creation because of the rapid turnover of small firms, but thats a steady-state observation.  In the growth phase of the business cycle, because small businesses are so cyclical, they actually contribute substantially, perhaps 40 percent or more, 
     to job additions during a recovery.  So the credit problems that they face could be an important problem directly affecting employment. Let me just say a couple of words about the credit crunch and banks.  I was encouraged to hear Governor Dukes views on banks.  There are some encouraging signs in terms of profitability, liquidity, and credit quality.  Nevertheless, as I mentioned before, the actual lending, the willingness to lend, and loans outstanding are quite constrained, and were seeing again very sharp declines in outstanding credit.  An interesting question is whether or not the declines in credit in the banking sector are the normal response to a deep recession or whether there is something additional going on. I may have remarked on this before, but to try to test that weve done vector auto regression analysis that includes bank credit, nominal GDP, and terms and conditions of lending, indicators from the SLOOS.  And what you find, interestingly, is that the decline in lending can be explained by the combination of slow growth and tighter conditions.  So in that respect it is normal, but the tightening of conditions itself is far greater than would be expected historically given the decline in the economy.  So what seems to be happening is that firms are making loans, but they are doing so under unusually tight terms and conditions, even conditional on the depth of the recession.  Now, there are two possible explanations for that.  One is that credit quality is worse than usual even given the state of the recession.  The other is that banks own problems, capital and so on, are restricting credit. In either case, that is concerning and suggests that the financial headwinds will be there as we go forward. Again, I do think that both the labor market and the credit markets are going to be very formidable issues going forward and make a moderate-to-slow recovery more likely than a rapid recovery. That being said, I just want to say for the record that there are some upside risks to 
          economic growth as well, and theyre a little harder to identify almost by necessity since one never knows where growth is going to come from, but these are important considerations. I want to talk once more, as I did last time, a bit about implications of low interest rates.  I think most would agree that there is a good policy case from the economys point of view for maintaining low rates. But I think we also would all agree that we need to continue to monitor any possible side effects from low rate policies that might be concerning.  One set of issues is speculative excesses, and I will say that we are trying here at the Boardand I hope you will at the Reserve Banks as wellto monitor even more closely than usual the state of asset prices as they evolve.  My sense isand Brian Sack talked about this yesterdaythat U.S. asset prices, so far at least, do not show any strong evidence of mispricing or asset bubbles.  In particularly, equity premiums are still above normal, so stock prices dont seem unusually high. Bond spreads seem reasonable given expected default rates in the state of the economy, and so on.  So in the United States so farthough as I say, we need to continue to monitor itI dont see that as being a near-term concern, although there is obviously a lot chatter about it, and that is one reason I think we need to be particularly attentive.   There is more concern about what is happening in Asia, where some markets seem to be overheated.  I just would make a point there, which is that the link between those asset prices in Asia and our monetary policy may be weaker than is sometimes believed.  There is a view espoused in some quarters that, because of the exchange rate management in Asia, Federal Reserve policies are essentially just imported into the Asian economies and, therefore, are a source of overheating in those economies.  A recent paper here at the Board by Erceg, Guerrieri, and Kamin looks at that from a number of different perspectives.  One of the interesting points that they make is that, if you look at the monetary policy indicatorsshort-term interest rates, for examplein Asian countries, 
           including China, and compare them with the U.S. federal funds rate, you see quite a bit of divergence because of capital controls and because of imperfect substitutability among assets.  Asia does seem to have some ability to conduct independent monetary policy. In that respect they obviously need to conduct policy thats appropriate for their region.  In addition, they have various kinds of quantitative controls on credit and on prices, and they also have fiscal policy.  So I think we need to pay attention to the Asian situation, but I would caution us not to overstate the responsibility of our policy for those excesses. A second area that we need to pay attention to in terms of the side effects from the low interest rates is the behavior of the dollar.  There were some anxious moments in the markets during the intermeeting period, but if you look at the pattern of the dollar over the last year or so, it seems to have been a fairly predictable and orderly evolution.  What we have seen, of course, is a rise in the dollar associated with safe haven demand and then an unwinding of that safe haven demand as the financial markets have improved.  Indeed, the current value of the dollar is about the same as it was before the crisis, the same as in June 2007, and nominal and real broad indexes are either equal to or higher than what they were in 1995.  So we see that there is not a really large secular movement in the dollar.  Moreover, a lower dollar may be necessarywe dont know for sureto address the current account situation.  The other relevant fact, I think, is that so far we dont see any evidence of a shift away from the dollar in reserve holdings.  But all that said, an orderly depreciation is orderly until its not orderly, and then at that point there may be a change, and we may be concerned.  I think an unstable dollar does have costs both for us and for the international monetary system, and obviously it also has implications for commodity prices, inflation expectations, and so on, which could force our hand or hamper our policy in ways that we would 
    otherwise not want to go.  So, again, I think that this is an area that we need to continue to pay attention to. Ive talked about inflation before.  Im not going to reiterate.  I think were all waiting for Jeff Fuhrer and the presentation in December to finally resolve all of the differences on the Committee about the dynamics of inflation.  [Laughter]  So Ill leave my views until that time. I will just once again close by saying that one of the important elementsI think everyone agreesis to demonstrate that we can and will exit at the appropriate time from our extraordinary policies.  The presentation yesterday about the progress being made on reverse repos and term deposits, the winding down of our liquidity programs, and so on shows that we are in fact, more so than some other countries, moving back toward a more normalized type of policy, which I think, when we are able to do that, would be very good news.  So let me stop there. Any questions or comments?  President Plosser.   MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, on your discussion about credit and banks and the amount of loans outstandingmy understanding is that if we look at, say, C&I loan outstanding credit, there are two components to that.  One is new loans being made, and there are also the write-downs of existing loans that reduce what appears to be the outstanding value.  So one of the things that I think would be interesting in looking at that is distinguishing between those two thingswhere the volume of new loans is, how much of it is new loan creation, and how much of it is just write-downs of existing loans; and that might tell us some interesting things about whats happening. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, thats a very important point.  I guess I would say that, given that C&I loans have fallen much more sharply than other categories, it would seem unlikely that write-downs would be the major source of that.  It is part of it, certainly.  But the other factor that affects those numbers is the ability of banks to make loans and then to securitize them.  And 
                                                      3 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). that has actually declined, which means that there is more holding of loans on their balance sheets.  So that to some extent goes in the other direction, but your point is well taken.  Other questions? MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER.  The research you referenced, VARs and lending, is that available?  Is that written up? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, this was just a simple VAR that I asked for, but certainly we can send it to you. MR. LACKER. Give us a list of the variables, well run it ourselves if we have to.  If it was written up, it would be really convenient. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other comments, questions?  All right.  Brian, let me turn to you for introducing the policy round.   MR. MADIGAN.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package labeled Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.  This package includes the revised versions of the draft policy statements that were distributed on Monday, with one small further change to alternative B shown in blue, and a correspondingly updated version of the sequence of policy statements and actions that was discussed in the Bluebook. As I noted yesterday, the forecasts that you provided for this round indicate that most of you anticipate the economic recovery over the next several years to be protracted, even more so than in the Greenbook.  The central tendencies of your projections of real GDP growth for 2010, 2011, and 2012 are on the low side of the corresponding Greenbook forecasts.  As a result, you generally see even slower 
progress than the staff in reducing unemployment over the next several years; 12 of you see the unemployment rate remaining at or above 7 percent three years ahead, above the forecast in the Greenbook extension of 6.1 percent.  Although many of you edged up your estimate of the sustainable rate of unemployment, nearly all of you 
estimate that rate to be no more than 5 percent, suggesting that you see considerable slack persisting for years. While some policymakers again noted in their forecast narratives that they view the linkage between slack and inflation as weak, others anticipate that the 
     underutilization of resources will put further downward pressure on inflation.  In any case, the central tendency of your inflation forecasts remains within a range of 1 to 2 percent over the next several years.  Most of you again indicated a view that, with appropriate monetary policy, inflation would be about 1 to 2 percent in the longer run. Thus, most of you continue to expect that inflation over the next several years will be on the low side of what you see as the mandate-consistent rate of inflation. The Committee might see this combination of substantial, persistent resource slack and very low inflation as motivation for adopting alternative A, page 2 of your package, at this meeting.  Under this alternative, the Committee would apply additional monetary policy stimulus by increasing its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities to $1.5 trillion, and it would retain the existing maximum of $200 billion for its agency debt purchases. In order to accomplish the increased MBS purchases and the substantial agency debt transactions without placing undue 
pressures on the associated markets, these programs would be extended through the second quarter. Staff estimates suggest that the increase in MBS purchases might lower longer-term rates 15 to 30 basis pointsalthough, admittedly, these estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty.  Such a decline in yields might provide sufficient stimulus to aggregate demand to reduce the unemployment rate two years ahead by as much as  percentage point relative to the rate that would otherwise prevail. The Committees statement would explain the decision to provide additional stimulus by noting that restraints on consumer spending and business spending suggest that the economic recovery will be relatively weak and that slack in resource utilization will diminish quite slowly absent further policy action and by highlighting that inflation has already fallen considerably over the past year.  To make very clear that the Committee did not anticipate raising rates at all for quite some time, the statement would indicate that the Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to  percent and continues to anticipate that low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation, and stable inflation expectations are likely to warrant this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate for an extended period. If the Committee instead saw its current policy stance as appropriately balancing the risks to growth and inflation and, in particular, as balancing the costs and benefits of large-scale asset purchases, it might be inclined toward adoption at this meeting of alternative B, shown on page 3. Even though policymakers generally anticipate a slow and protracted economic recovery, appreciable and persistent resource slack, and low inflation, the Committee might believe that continuing to stay its hand at this meeting is appropriate.  According to your economic forecasts, many of you no longer see the risks to economic growth as skewed significantly to the downside.  And although you generally also see the risks to inflation as balanced, many of you are still quite uncertain about the inflation outlook.  Even with an assessment that the risks to the inflation outlook are balanced, at this stage you might see the potential costs of providing additional stimulusincluding possible adverse effects on 
      inflation expectations and incrementally greater challenges in implementing an exit strategyas outweighing the potential benefits in terms of a reduction in economic slack and an inflation rate closer to your objective. Under alternative B, you would leave the settings on your policy instruments essentially unchanged, making no adjustments to your federal funds rate target range or your MBS purchase amounts and no major modifications to your forward guidance or agency debt purchases. The first two paragraphs of the statement would largely repeat the language used in September.  The statement would indicate that economic activity continues to pick up and that conditions in financial markets have been roughly unchanged over the intermeeting period.  The Committee would again mention that various factors are likely to continue to restrain household and business spending and that, consequently, economic activity would probably be weak for a time, but the statement would still note that past policy actions and market forces are likely to support a strengthening of economic growth.  In paragraph 2, the Committee would once more note that resource slack and stable inflation expectations were likely to keep inflation subdued for some time. The Committee would continue to indicate in the third paragraph that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. However, using new language, the Committee would specify 
that those economic conditions include low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations.  By referring to economic conditions generally and by citing three factors that are included in the set of conditions, the Committee would make clear that these three factors would not necessarily be the sole triggers for changes in the Committees policy stance.  Also, by referring to subdued inflation trends, this version would avoid implying that the Committee would necessarily respond to short-term changes in realized inflation rates, which could be driven by factors such as transitory fluctuations in energy price inflation. Under alternative B, the Committee would indicate that it decided to purchase about $175 billion of agency debt securities, somewhat less than the previously announced maximum of $200 billion.  The Committee might believe that it was 
unlikely to purchase the full $200 billion maximum amount; after allowing for some 
tapering, the Desks current pace of purchases is consistent with total purchases of around $175 billion between now and the end of the first quarter of next year.  Relative to the language circulated on Monday, we suggested a small additional 
revision to help clarify that this was the Committees motivation for making the 
change. Although market participants generally do not anticipate that the Committee 
will alter its plans for agency debt purchases, the contemplated adjustment is small.  Moreover, the overall announcement appears to be broadly in line with market expectations and thus seems unlikely to prompt a sizable market reaction. Under alternative C, page 4, the Committee would reduce the degree of monetary accommodation by scaling back its large-scale asset purchases at this meeting.  The 
      Committee might be inclined to adopt this alternative if it saw the recovery as now reasonably well established and was not especially concerned that slack might push inflation to excessively low levels. The Committee might also be motivated to adopt this approach if were concerned that it might have difficulty reversing its accommodative policy stance at the appropriate time or, possibly, if it were worried that very substantial amounts of liquidity in the financial system might already be in the process of causing significant distortions in asset prices. In the first paragraph of the announcement for alternative C, the Committee would indicate that an economic recovery appears to be under way.  The statement would note that household spending appears to be expanding, without citing the list of possible restraints that are referenced in alternative B, and would mention that businesses appear to have made additional progress in bringing inventories into better alignment with sales.  The second paragraph would express the expectation that, with appropriate monetary policy adjustments, inflation will remain at levels consistent with price stability, thereby acknowledging an active role for policymakers in influencing the inflation outlook. In the third paragraph, the Committee would note that it anticipates maintaining low, rather than exceptionally low, levels of the funds rate and for some time, rather than for an extended period.  Clearly, these two changes would be read by market participants as suggesting that the Committee 
was beginning to think seriously about raising short-term interest rates.  The Committee would back up those changes in words with actionreductions in its large-scale asset purchases, to $1.1 trillion of MBS and $160 billion of agency debt.  It would also indicate an intention to complete those purchases by January rather than March. These changes would directly reduce support for those asset classes and their close substitutes, and it would also significantly reduce the accumulation of reserves in the banking system relative to that of alternative B.  With market participants not anticipating any significant change in policy settings at this meeting, the combination of the change in wording and the reduction in asset purchases under this alternative would likely trigger an appreciable backup in market interest rates. The Bluebook also provided for your consideration an illustrative sequence of policy language and actions going forward. That sequence, modified slightly to reflect the changes we have made to the draft policy alternatives, is included on the next couple of pages of the package. Key portions of the policy alternatives for todays meeting are shown in step 2. Depending on how conditions unfold, language similar to that in step 2 for either alternative A or alternative B could be repeated for several meetings.  If the Committee were to adopt alternative A or alternative B 
today, at some future meeting, once the economic recovery is viewed as sufficiently established, the Committee might consider modifying its guidance to refer to the 
maintenance of either low or exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate and for some time, rather than for an extended period, as in step 3.  If the 
Committee instead selects alternative C at this meeting, it would have already 
adopted the for some time language proposed for step 3.   
     Once the situation has progressed to the point that the Committee has concluded that policy firming would soon be appropriate, it might consider a number of changes to its policy language and forward guidance.  For example, as shown in step 4, the Committee might want to indicate that some or a gradual reduction in the exceptionally large degree of monetary accommodation will be appropriate before long. The following sentence could note that such tightening would be conditioned on economic and financial circumstances but still provide somewhat more specificity about the Committees sense of when that reduction might be initiatedfor example, by narrowing it down to a half-year interval.  The remainder of the paragraph would discuss the tools that the Federal Reserve anticipated using to accomplish this reduction, including increases in the rate of interest on reserves, reverse repos, and term deposits for banks.  It could also indicate that, although the Federal Reserve currently does not have plans to sell assets from its portfolio, it retains the option of such sales. An example of the language that could accompany a decision to commence policy firming is shown as the fifth step.  Here we have assumed that the Committee retains 
a target range for the federal funds rate, at least initially.  We have further assumed that the discount rate and the interest rate on reserves would be raised commensurately with the increase in the federal funds rate target.  In the example, the Committee would direct the Desk to use reverse repos to reduce the quantity of excess reserves in the banking system to reinforce the upward pressure on short-term 
interest rates; however, it is also possible that the Committee might decide to drain reserves from the banking system before it raised its target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee could indicate its intention to further or gradually reduce 
the still-exceptional degree of monetary accommodation in subsequent months.  The statement could again indicate the tools that might be employed to execute this reduction and reiterate that asset sales could also be employed. Of course, the Committees exit strategy potentially has many moving parts, and at this stage the exact combination and sequence in which these tools would be used is not entirely clear. Thus, we emphasized in the Bluebook that these drafts should be viewed only as illustrative. Nonetheless, they might be helpful to the Committee in considering how its near-term policy decisions might fit into a broader plan for ultimately removing policy accommodation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. I have actually a quick question.  In the final part of the exit, you have a federal funds rate target, which changes, and then you support that with an increase in interest rate on reserves, and so on.  Are we comfortable with that? The alternative would be, say, to tighten monetary conditionsThe Federal Reserve is taking the following actionsand those would include the interest rate on reserves, sterilization of some  
reserves, and so on. You dont have to answer the question now exactly, but it seems to me that an alternative, rather than targeting the federal funds rate, might be simply to state the actions that we would be taking, which we know we can control, and therefore reduce that slippage. MR. MADIGAN. Yes. That certainly seems as though it is worth further thought and discussion. And I dont have a definite answer for you at this point.  One disadvantage of proceeding in that direction might be that market participants would wonder what happened to the target funds rate range and why the Committee didnt set one.  And it would seem that we would need to explain why we didnt set one. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Brian, in your discussion of alternative B and the new language that precedes the extended period statement, if I heard you correctly you were saying that you were proposing to add the new language, but it is not necessarily the sole trigger, and that that is conveyed in the statement.  Is that conveyed by the word including? MR. MADIGAN. Yes, President Lockhart, that was our thoughtthat by referencing primarily economic conditions and then including a subordinate set of phrases, these specific items, those would not be necessarily the only factors that could lead to a change in the target range. MR. LOCKHART. And it is your sense that adding this new language, which is a lot more specific as to conditionality, is balanced with the including word and others to convey that it is not necessarily those factors that are going to dictate our decision. MR. MADIGAN. That was our thought. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. 
 MR. PLOSSER. Just in thinking about this transition, one of the things that would be interesting to know isand, Mr. Chairman, you talked a bit about this yesterdaywhere do you want to get to at the end of the day in terms of how we are going to conduct policy? Are we going to envision ourselves in a corridor system of some kind or a floor system? How are we going to treat the federal funds market?  Getting more specific about where that endpoint is, where we think we want to get to as we come to more normal policy, would be helpful to us, and then working backwards to figure out the transition we want to get there.  I think this is a really good exercise for us to be doing, and so I would encourage you to keep pursuing that, and thinking about that endpoint would be a useful addition to thinking about that. MR. MADIGAN. And we do continue that work. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you. Its a small question.  I am probably parsing this too closely, but the words that you gave usin alternative A, you refer to this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate for an extended period, and, in B, exceptionally low levels . . . for an extended period. My inference on this would be that B accepts the possibility that this might be a higher funds rate than 0 to , since it is not this exceptionally low. I wouldnt have interpreted B that way, butam I parsing too much? MR. MADIGAN. Well, that was the distinction.  Alternative A just pins it down more tightly than B does, but it may not be an important MR. EVANS. I would guess that the Committees interpretation of B is this 0 to  range for an exceptional period of time.  Okay. Thanks. MR. KOHN. And that repeats the language of the September 
 MR. EVANS. Yes, it does. It is something only we would recognize as a difference, because we see A and B. [Laughter] MR. FISHER. Brian accented this. MR. EVANS. Well, its in red. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. He used the language.  I assure you that someone will notice it. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This has to do with your interpretation of the including word. The original version last week was that we continue to anticipate that these three things are likely to warrant low levels for an extended period.  I interpreted that as a one-way thing and as that we are not going to raise rates unless one of these three things changes.  So there are two things. First, I take low rates of resource utilization to be a broad reference to the level of economic activity.  Then there is inflation.  I am wondering what else there is that is relevant to policy. And then I have another question. MR. MADIGAN. Well, just as an example, and this may or may not be a good example, the value of the dollar was mentioned earlier as a possible consideration in making monetary policy. The revised language was intended just to loosen things up a bit so that it was not solely these three factors that would necessarily drive policy decisions. MR. LACKER. The second question is, The original way in which I read this is that we are not going to raise rates unless one of these three things changes; is that the way you interpreted the original? MR. MADIGAN. Well, it is not an absolute commitment.  It is an expectation. But apart from that distinctionyes. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is the Bellman principle, President Lacker.  The Bellman principle is that, if the situation looks the same, you do the same.  Right? If the economy looks six months from now exactly as it looks today MR. LACKER. Yes, I understand that. But now there is a fourth thing that we are not telling them about, which could induce us to change rates, even if these other three things MR. FISHER. Are you talking about the dollar? MR. LACKER. Whatever it is. MR. FISHER. Oh, the unknown fourth thing. 
MR. LACKER. We are saying that we are not going to change rates unless one of these three things changes or a fourth secret thing changes.  Is that the right way to interpret this? MR. MADIGAN. Well, I dont certainly see it as referencing a secret.  Clearly, these three factors that we list explicitly are very important factors in governing the stance in policy.  But, again, this is simply intended to allow for the possibility that something else might incline the Committee to adjust its policy even without a significant change in these three items. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it conveys a sense also of not being an automatic mechanical triggerthat there is still going to be judgment involved in looking at all of these issues. MR. LACKER. But it is one way, right?  It says that we are not going to do it unless one of these three things changes. But if one of these three changes, we dont have to do it, the way it was worded before. So it doesnt require us to do it if one of these changes.  It just means one of those things has to change before we do it. Right?  Thats the way I was interpreting it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont think it actually means that.  Remember what we said originally. We made a forecast of policy that we said economic conditions would likely 
 justify. It wasnt an unconditional forecast.  It was a conditional forecast that we thought the economy was going to evolve in such a way that would justify low rates of interest, and this is a description of some of the things that we would be looking at that we expect to happen and that would, therefore, tend to keep us at the low rate. MR. LACKER. I guess what Im saying is that the way it was before and the way it was done, if conditions are in this set, rates will be low. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Likely. MR. LACKER. And if they are out of this set, all bets are off.  Were not saying whether they are going to be low or not.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We can go back to the old language if you want, but the purpose of it is to try to provide more explicit information about what we are going to be looking at. MR. LACKER. Exactly. I endorse that entirely. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And I think the presumption would be, if there were a sharp change in inflation expectations, for example, that we would respond to it. MR. LACKER. Absolutely. Yes. I think it is valuable to provide some more guidance like this and to round out the reaction function.  But my interpretation is that we are just saying that in this set of conditions we expect low rates.  It is sort of asymmetric in that regard.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it would be read as saying that, if these conditions fail to hold, we would have to respond to it or at least seriously consider responding to it. MR. LACKER. All right. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Brian?  President Pianalto.  
 MS. PIANALTO. Mr. Chairman, when the first draft of alternative B came out, it dropped economic conditions and just listed these three factors, and I commented to Brian that I thought that was just too narrow because it was so closely focused on these three factors.  So I prefer this revised language because it leaves in economic conditions and then, as you point out, highlights these three factors.  I just wanted to highlight that it was a concern that I had raised.  I prefer the language as it is now. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions for Brian? Okay. The coffee is ready. And in order not to interrupt the policy go-round, why dont we take a break and restart at 11:00.  Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why dont we recommence with the policy go-round. President Plosser, lead-off hitter. MR. PLOSSER. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While the timing of our exit from this period of extraordinary monetary policy accommodation remains highly uncertain, I do think it is important for the Committee to begin to consider language that begins to prepare the markets 
for that eventuality. Never being shy about being a maverick, I think that we should begin that process sooner rather than later. Thus, I have a general preference for the language in alternative C, although even in C I would not choose at this point to cut MBS purchases from $1.25 trillion to $1.1 trillion. Just at our last meeting we took out up to and, therefore, committed to $1.25 trillion. I dont think cutting it would be a good idea.  It would confuse the market at this point. However, for some strange reason, I get the impression that the Committee is not yet ready to adopt alternative C. [Laughter] Maybe one of the more understated statements I have made, but I certainly get that impression.   
 But I do think there are some elements of C that could be useful incorporating into alternative B to help prepare markets for a shift in policy stance at some point.  So I would like to suggest a couple of those in particular.  I think the emphasis in paragraph 2 of C on stable inflation expectationsand, particularly I like the language on policy adjustments that will keep inflation at levels consistent with price stabilityis good language.  From my perspective, this indicates a more proactive approach to price stability, which I think is appropriate.  Thus, I would prefer to substitute paragraph 2 of C for paragraph 2 of B.  Now, an intermediate step for that might be to leave paragraph 2 in B as is and substitute inflation will remain subdued in the near term for inflation will remain subdued for some time.  Then include a sentence in B adopting from C with appropriate policy adjustments the Committee expects inflation to remain at levels consistent with price stability, reinforcing our efforts to say that we will clearly deliver on this. The other modification I would make to alternative B is in the forward guidance for the funds rate in paragraph 3. Obviously, I would have preferred that we move away from an extended period and substitute some time.  I think this is a signal that the policy environment is in fact changing. We have kept rates near zero now for almost a year, and the extended 
period language has been in place since March. I think we are closer in time, whenever that time may be, to raising rates today than we were in March, and now might be a useful time to indicate as much. In fact, even if we were to raise rates to 50 basis points or to 75 basis points, they would still be extraordinarily low by any historical standard.  Indeed, there may be some real advantage to moving policy modestly away from the zero bound to allow these short-term financial markets and money markets to begin operating more normally in a more normal environment.  I would 
 suggest that we need to consider the fact that our extensive intervention in some of these markets may be an inhibitor to the financial and economic recovery that we all desire.  In any event, changing the language in this manner is not inconsistent with other actions we have taken to gradually unwind our extraordinary actions. For example, we have ended the Treasury purchase program.  We are limiting TAF auctions.  We are prepared to cap purchases at less than the full amount of agency debt in the statement.  And we have suggested the termination of some other liquidity programs.  The markets now know that we will gradually remove accommodation, so I dont see that a shift in terms of this language would be either dramatic or disruptive.  Yes, probably the timing of the language change may come as a surprise, and there may be some immediate market reaction.  I dont think this should deter us, since I also think there are costs to waiting too long to at least signal that we are contemplating a more direct exit.   With respect to the new language in alternative B, paragraph 3, I prefer the revision to what was in the Bluebook, although I am a little uncomfortable with some of the ambiguity.  By being explicit about resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations as among the joint determinants of monetary policywhich I think is what the language is trying to dowe seem to be preparing the markets for the possibility that monetary policy would react to unwelcome inflationary developments, even if resource utilization is lower than we would like. I think that is a good thing.  We ought to be doing that, and I am supportive of being more explicit about the nature of our reaction function and the factors that matter.  I think that is important for transparency and communication. On the other hand, of course, my view about yet another repetition of resource utilization language is that this reinforces my concern about our narrative that I talked about yesterday that our narrative about resource utilization is something I am uncomfortable with and it may 
  unduly tie our hands if we are not careful. Nevertheless, even with that I am in favor of the language change. But I do not want, and I dont think we should prefer, to take steps that explicitly or implicitly are designed to lower the expected future funds rate path.  In fact, I think it would serve us well if the statement raised the path somewhat. I agree with President Bullard that this Committee has historically not begun a tightening cycle until often two years or more after the trough.  However, while that may be true about our behavior, I dont infer from that that such behavior is in any way optimal or desirable, and so I wouldnt want to take that forecast as meaning that we shouldnt do anything for the next two years; that shouldnt govern our response. One part of the language that I am a little uncomfortable about is that I find the use of the phrase subdued inflation trends somewhat ambiguous and, thus, kind of lacking content and transparency. How is the market supposed to know what we think the inflation trend is if we cant define it for ourselves?  If what we mean is core inflation, then we ought to say so.  What we seem to want to be signaling, as Brian indicated, is that we may not be worried or we wont worry about reacting to rising commodity prices and oil prices.  At the same time, if we dont want to react to thoseI dont recall us going to such pains to make such a distinction when oil prices plummeted from $150 a barrel to $70 a barrel last fall and winter and then we reacted to that with fears of deflation. So I think a model of the deflation that we have witnessed over the 
past year, particularly in headline and to some degree in core, is partly a pass-through reflection of oil prices falling, just as we get some upside when oil prices rose.  We werent very explicit about the nature of relative price movements during that period, and so we seem to be 
asymmetric in our reaction function, and I dont think we should be. 
    Once again, I think we find ourselves in somewhat of a language box, which could be greatly mitigated by having an explicit, well-articulated inflation target.  What we really should worry about is the impact of these relative price shifts on expectations of inflation, and having an inflation target specified over a reasonable period would allow us to focus on headline inflation and give us much less angst in wordsmithing challenges and explaining what we mean. I will simply note that I am also comfortable with reducing the volume to $175 billion of the agency debt. The Desk has warned us a couple of times about fears and concerns they may have about our dominating that market and the functioning of that agency debt market.  So I think it is appropriate that we try to exit ourselves from that as soon as possible. Finally, I would like to commend the staff for including the section on a possible sequence of language and actions in the most recent Bluebook.  I think this is a great step in the right direction.  It is important that we begin thinking ahead about how we will exit and the language that would help us do that.  As I mentioned before, it would be nice if we could define for ourselves what the new operating regime will be in normal times, and then work backwards 
in our language so that we get to the place where we want to be.  But I found this a step in the 
right direction.  This is a useful exercise, and I hope we will continue it.   I have a couple of comments. One, in paragraph 4 of table 2 in the Bluebookpolicy firming is likely soon, I guess is the titleI think this may be too small a step.  Actually, I think the first step we might consider taking at some time might be a step to eliminate the range from 0 to  percent for our fed funds rate, that maybe we just ought to set it at  percent as a first step. I think we can do this. It wouldnt be effectively raising effective rates very much.  It 
would send an important signal, and it would give us some experience in operating under a true interest-on- reserves regime in figuring out how close we could come to actually hitting our 
 target with IOR. So I think that maybe could be a useful first step at distant future. And then, depending on how that works, we can go from there as we move forward. The other thing is that I do not favor establishing calendar dates to describe our policy 
path. Policy is state-contingent, where states are economic conditions, not necessarily date-dependent. And I think we need to avoid that if we can.  We must continue to stress that distinction, and work better and harder to articulate the nature of the relevant states that we will react to, which is why I favor the new language in alternative B. Another possibility that does not seem included in table 2, but is discussed in the Bluebook and I think deserves more discussion, is the option for us to begin soaking up some of the excess reserves from the banking system before we make an explicit decision to raise rates.  A modest program of selling assets earlier rather than later might support the effectiveness of interest-on-reserves mechanisms and our ability to hit the target.  It would also lead to a smaller 
monetary base on which to implement some of our reserve-management tools and maybe even negate the need for them as we go forward. Thus I would urge us to develop this option more fully and think along the lines of eliminating the range for the federal funds rate.   As a footnote, I would remind the Committee that last time we had a discussion about the supplementary financing program with the Treasury.  Over the last two months, if I read the numbers correctly, something like $150 billion has been added to excess reserves simply because of the Treasurys termination of that program.  I think we need to be explicit about what we are doing with that program and how it is affecting excess reserves.  The policy discussion seems to indicate there is some assumption that it is going to come back to $200 billion next year.  I dont know whether it will or not.  It certainly might.  But if it doesnt come back, the Treasury is conducting quantitative easing on behalf of us.  And I think we need to explicitly address that 
  concern and make some explicit choices about whether we want that sterilized or not, and I think that is going to be an important step going forward. Finally, the last topicparagraph 5 of table 2 in the Bluebook, I thinkis on the discount rate decision, and we talked a little about this last time.  We are going to need to address the issue of the appropriate spread between primary credit rates and the fed funds rate or the term deposit rate. Do we want the penalty rate to come back? If so, by how much and when? And how does that interact with our decisions on raising rates?  Ifand this is a big ifwe have effectively driven stigma from the system in part through the crisis and by the TAF, I dont think we want to have stigma return if we can help it because we would like the discount window to operate more effectively.  So that may affect how we think about the penalty rate.  It would certainly affect how our credit officers in our individual banks react when they pick up the phone to call a bank and say, You have been at the discount window for a week now.  What is going on?  That is something that many of our credit officers do.  It is prudence, but it contributes to solidifying the stigma process, which I think we would like to get rid of.  In any event, I would encourage the staff to continue working on these important aspects of our transition and the future of the discount window. I appreciate their efforts.  Thank you very much. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser, just a couple of factual matters.  I think we do anticipate that the Treasury will raise its balances again.  But if they dont, well have to address that.  Second, I think a lot of people around the table agree with you about inflation targets, but if they are to be credible and democratically legitimate, they need to have at least some political support.  And I think this moment is probably not the optimal point.  Okay. President Rosengren. MR. PLOSSER. I just keep making my plugs.  Thats all. [Laughter] 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I understand. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B and the language. We are seeing some initial signs of recovery, but that recovery is likely to be weak and subject to reversal.  Given that we make little progress on reaching full employment or 2 percent core PCE inflation over the forecast period, even with the funds rate pinned at zero, I am strongly in favor of retaining the extended period language.  Given the significantly greater losses that would be associated with the realization of downside versus upside risks to my growth outlook, I hope we retain some policy flexibility over the coming months.  I can easily conceive of conditions under which we would need to provide additional stimulus to the economy. Two additional comments.  First, while I am comfortable with the language that has been added surrounding the agency purchase program, I would say I still am concerned that some will view that as a policy change. So to the extent that we can possibly use informal mechanisms to reiterate that it is not a policy change, I think that would be advisable.  Second, in terms of communicating policy as we do start shifting to changes, I think we should focus on things that we know we can influence.  So interest on reserves would be where I would be focusing the statements, at least initially, until we get a better sense of how that works.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At this time, I dont think it is warranted to increase interest rates, so I am in favor of alternative B, with some comments on the language that I want to focus on. First, let me say with regard to the agency debt language, it is still $175 billion too high in my view. But it is a step in the right direction.  I would support that 
change. I share President Plossers eagerness to move to the some time language, but right now I think it is probably too soon, with all due respect, to make that move.  So I am happy leaving the extended period language in there.  I strongly support adding the list of economic conditions to spell out, to some extent, the nature of our reaction function.  I think that is a good idea. I think that is way better than treating markets to an extended period of altered adjectives on our way to our first increase. My comments have to do with just wanting to tighten up how we all understand that and how we communicate that new language. So, as I said earlierand I did a very imprecise job of explaining thisthe way I view the little grammatical construction of the sentence is that our forecast is, if these three conditions are all true, then interest rates will be low.  Now, in my view, that doesnt say anything about the states of the world in the future in which one of those is false.  So I dont view it as, strictly speaking, tying our hands to move if one of those conditions is violated. So I think it is a minimal, nice, sort of judicious conveyance of the things we are going to be focusing on and that are important, what they can count on with regard to keeping interest rates low, and what might trigger but wouldnt necessarily trigger an increase.  So I dont think it ties our hands too much.  I know that is always a broad concern.  From that point of view, I am a little uncomfortable with the including language.  Maybe we wont keep secret these other conditions, which is not to put them in the statement, but its hard to think of another condition that we care about that wouldnt have an effect or be expected to have an effect on these three thingsinflation and rates of resource utilization, which I take to be a reference broadly to economic activity.  So the value of the dollar, for example, is going to have an effect on economic activity.  Fiscal policy potentially is something you might point to, but, there again, that would imply a change in economic activity absent our reaction.  So I dont view this as 
 useful, and it waters down the conditionality because, remember, it would make the statement that there are more than three things that have to be true, and we are going to tell you three of them, under which interest rates will always be low.  But there are some others we are not going to tell you about. So I think it would be clear if we dropped the including and went back to the original thing. The main concern I have about the language is the phrase low rates of resource utilization. Now, let me make clear that, unlike President Plosser, I dont object to the use of the phrase resource utilization here because this is not in the context of an inflation forecast.  I think it is quite logical to benchmark our description of the level of economic activity in terms of some normative or long-run averages or sorts of norms, the way President Kocherlakota did.  So I am comfortable with it in this context.  My concern is that low is a very imprecise term and could be interpreted more broadly than I think we have in mind.  And to my mind, it has this whiff of association with policy under the sort of stopgo era of policy, when we waited until we got back to something like full employment or thought of ourselves as waiting until the unemployment rate was all the way back again to normal before we raised rates.  And I dont think we want to be that liberal.  I dont think we want to cast that wide a net around the conditions under which we are going to keep rates low.  So I would be more comfortable with a tighter characterization. Now, this also made me think of President Bullards memo, in which he argued that the range of uncertainty about the level of the output gap is an argument for working in terms of first differences rather than levels of gaps. And that would suggest some sort of first-difference language here. Unfortunately, the best I could come up with was non-increasing rates of resource utilization. That struck me as so clunky and so obscure as to not really be a serious 
  contender. As a substitute for that, some tighter characterization of low would be usefullike very low. [Laughter] I thought about stagnant, moribund, depressed, and went through the thesaurus function of Microsoft Word pretty thoroughly.  But very low is about the best I could come up with.  I think that it would be useful to constrain the amount of information we are conveying a bit in a way that I think is consistent withI mean, lets be honest herewe are looking forward to a period in which I think we all recognize that we bring to this table some very different predilections about sooner rather than later, later rather than sooner.  And well wrestle with those issues when the time comes.  In this statement, lets just look for a consensus across both camps.  Lets just look for something that we can all sign onto here.  Its in that spirit that I think very low is preferable to me to just low rates of resource utilizationas hopelessly finagling as that sounds. So let me comment a bit about asset sales because this came up yesterday.  First of all, I want to commend the Bluebook, which sketched out what the steps might look like.  I think it is a very good thing for us to think about devoting some time to really discussing and analyzing that. I am going to have some suggestions for staff analysis that in the future might help us work through that. But my presumption would have been that we would view asset sales as our first choice rather than our last choice.  So I would like to see some discussion and analysis of that going forward. I appreciate the value of additional tools.  I dont object to our building them and having them in place.  But there are essentially two reasons that I think we ought to think about asset sales first. One is that it is not obvious the extent to which reverse RPs and term deposits are going to be as effective at altering monetary conditions as asset sales.  We talked yesterday about the extent to which reverse RPs or term deposits are nonmonetary.  Obviously, just that little cost 
   makes them to some extent nonmonetary.  But that cost, which could be kind of small in some contexts, is a measure of how close they are to being virtually a perfect substitute.  Moreover, with reserve balances as high as they are, surely some banks view it as extremely likely that four weeks from now they are going to want as much reserves as they have now.  If that is true, then a bunch of the reserve holdings are in some sense inframarginal, and for them to convert those to term deposits may not have any effect on their desire to shift funds out of excess reserve balance holdings. So there is some uncertainty to my mind.  I think there is a good chance that they will succeed but also a good chance that they will just be viewed as a perfect substitute for overnight reserves and wont have much of an effect. Second of all, just asset sales in generalyesterday we heard evidence from the manager that our purchases have driven down MBS rates by much more than they drove down Treasury rates. Remember earlier in the year we had this sequence:  In December, we got these predictions from the staff that the effects of Treasury purchases versus MBS purchases were different in amount.  Then, a couple of meetings later, there was sort of an about-face, and it was a parallel shift. They thought that they would have the same effect under the idea that there is a good arbitrage between the two. Now, it seems as though the evidence over this year of experience is that we have driven down MBS rates more than we have driven down Treasury rates. Those spreads were described as abnormally low, which suggests to some extent relative to some long-run norm that we are distorting markets now.  As we exit from what we are doing 
now, we ought to be thinking about where we want to go, and I think we want to go to a world where we are not having this permanently expansionary effect from depressing MBS rates.  I will just mention as well the hypothesisand I havent seen any evidence against this that by buying MBS we are implicitly withdrawing credit from some other sector of the 
   economy.  I mean, it is bound to be true.  So whether it is net stimulative is completely uncertain.  It is not at all clear that this is stimulative on net for the economy to drive down MBS rates rather than Treasury rates. So on a lot of grounds I would like to see us transition to being out of the housing finance business a couple of years from now, and there are abundant political economy reasons to do that as well. I recognize that asset sales, even announcing them, might have a dramatic price effect.  But the minute we raise the interest rate on excess reserves, we are going to have a yield curve effect.  There is going to be a selloff of Treasuries.  They are going to know that this is it:  Here it comesa sequence of tightening moves.  So I dont think that should dissuade usthat it might be an outsized move.   Those are the broad reasons I think that asset sales deserve equal time on our agenda and some serious analysis as instruments as we move forward.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Lacker.  President Yellen. MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  With the funds rate effectively constrained at zero and our large-scale asset-purchase programs nearing completion, communication relating to the future path of policy is the main tool now available to shape market expectations, influence longer-term interest rates, and thereby affect the overall degree of monetary accommodation.  For this reason, I think its important that we clearly communicate our goals and policy strategy, and I very much like alternative Bs clear portrayal of the key factors that will guide our future policy decisions consistent with our own past behaviornamely, resource utilization, inflation trends, and inflation expectations.  Thats not to rule out the possibility that some other factors could play a role, but these have been the prime drivers in the past, and I think should and 
    will be the prime drivers going forward.  It is because I expect resource utilizationnamely, unemploymentto remain far above the NAIRU for a long time, for core inflation to be below my preferred 2 percent objective, and inflation expectations to remain anchored that my own policy expectations accord with the assumptions in the Greenbook and the constrained optimal policy path in the Bluebook.  Of course, we are in wait-and-see mode now.  But at this critical juncture we need to be very careful not to add to market confusion about what the main determinants will be of policy going forward, and I fear that, if we are confusing, we may hinder recovery and the attainment of price stability. I was pleased to see the additional language relating to our decision on agency debt in the revised version of B.  I think its very important to avoid leaving market participants with the impression that our decision not to go up to the maximum of $200 billion reflects a shift in our intended monetary policy path.  And I would support President Rosengrens suggestion that, if there is an informal way to convey to market participants that this was a technical decision rather than a policy decision, doing so would be useful. On the issue of asset sales, I also agree with Presidents Bullard and Lacker that we should consider using asset sales as part of an exit strategy, especially if we think that the market for MBS is beginning to normalize and function more effectively.  I think, as we taper down our purchases over the next couple of months, were going to get a much better sense of that.  But if thats a properly functioning market, I also think it may make sense to begin to actually sell assets when this is a long way offwe finally exit.  I would not necessarily assume that were only going to let those run off our portfolio rather than sell them. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 
           MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor the language of alternative B.  I agree with President Plosser that the passage of time and the confirmation of the upturn in the economy brings exit closer, but the outcomes are still quite unsatisfactory through 2012, certainly by my forecast.  And looking at the central tendency of the Committees forecast, as Brian pointed out, in 2012 we still have resource utilization a couple of percentage points below where we think it should be over the longer run and inflation below where we think it should end up.  So being constrained at the lower bound, were not in any way at an optimal setting, and I think it will be quite a while before we tighten.  I had my tightening in mid-2011.  I think President Plosser and President Lacker have raised interesting points about how to structure the exit and what to do, and so we have all next year to discuss it.  [Laughter]  Doesnt that sound like fun? Paragraphs 1 and 2 to me present the right picture, which is that not much has changed since the last meeting, and thats the consensus here.  So Im happy with that language.  Obviously, with my policy expectations, I feel very strongly that we ought to retain the extended period language. With regard to the three factors in here, I think thats a good idea.  Those factors are related to our mandate, and to my mind, levels are very important not only because of the legislative mandate but also because they make sense in my economic model.  Adding those factors underlines that its a conditional forecast that talks about the economic conditions, and it gives us some elements to talk about as we edge closer to exit, whenever that might be.  I like that the words anticipate and then are likely to give a certain forward-looking aspect to it, and thats right.  We should be thinking about what those factors are going to be in four or eight quarters, not necessarily what they are today.  I think that President Lacker is right:  The including language suggests that something else might be out there.  It gives us some flexibility.  To my mind, these issues about the dollar and asset prices would play primarily through these three factors that we have here and 
    wouldnt have an independent role in monetary policy, but the way it is worded gives us a little flexibility in that regard.  And I could live with President Lackers suggestion about putting very in front of low rates of resource utilization.  After all, were justifying exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate. I agree with specifying the $175 billion.  Thats the path were on.  Why not reduce uncertainty as long as were clear about the fact that its because of the market functioning that were doing this and were not really pulling back policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Bullard. MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Id like to focus my remarks on a suggested handling of the asset-purchase program going forward versus exclusive focus on interest rate movements as the next important policy choice for this Committee.  I have been disappointed by an overemphasis on interest rates in the markets versus discussion of the quantitative easing program.  I think that this reflects a hangover from a long period of time, 25 years or longer, when interest rate movements defined what this Committee was doing with regard to monetary policy, and that markets have not really fully adjusted to the fact that we have other tools in place that we can adjust to try to implement a stabilization policy.  Then at the end, Ill turn to a few comments on issues about the statement and alternative B. A broad description of monetary policy over the last year to my mind would go like this.  In December 2008, almost one year ago, we adopted our near-zero interest rate policy.  In January 2009, we naturally switched to a quantitative easing program focused primarily on agency MBS, which if Im not mistaken, the Chairman has described as relatively standard now around the world for many central banks.  And in March 2009, we made a dramatic expansion of that commitment, which were still living up to and which will not be completed until the first quarter of 2010.  The 
            quantitative easing program has been considered successful, and we saw some estimates yesterday.  I think we all understand that theres a lot of uncertainty around those estimates; nevertheless, I think it is generally considered to have been an effective program. When I talk about monetary policy, I try to exclude liquidity programs that I regard as lender-of-last resort responses to the crisis, such as swaps, the TAF, and commercial paper.  All those facilities that are now running down; they reached a peak of almost $1.5 trillion, but now are all winding down. So I consider those separately, and I consider the asset-purchase program to be the hallmark of our quantitative easing program.  This description suggests a certain logic, believe it or not, to current policy, which is to pursue interest rate targeting in normal times and to switch to quantitative easing if the zero bound is encountered.  And that suggests that the tightening sequence should go the other way:  gradually remove the quantitative easing and then raise rates later as appropriate, given the information that comes in on the economy. Now, I think one of the key problems from the point of view of the way the Committee is thinking right now is that we do not currently view our quantitative easing program in feedback rule form. There is some talk about it, but we dont really think in terms of adjusting the quantitative easing program one way or another in response to incoming data.  We more or less have the idea that were going to go to our limit that we set in March of last year and then were going to stay there and let it run off the balance sheet.  I do not think that that is an optimal policy.  We should begin to adjust that program going forward in 2010, and in particular, possibly sell some MBS as the first indication of a tightening move. So what are the advantages of proceeding in this direction? I see this as a softer way to tighten policy than making a funds rate move or even than changing the extended period language as described in the extra section in the Bluebook this time.  If we make any moves on the funds rate 
      target or really interest on reservesa phrase that used to be used around here was ringing the gongwere really making a loud statement that were now embarked on a tightening program.  People will immediately extrapolate a whole sequence of moves, and that will be a big event when it occurs. Maybe its a long way away, as Governor Kohn just said, but that would be a big move.  So if we did it this other way, which says, Okay, were going to gradually sell off some of the MBS, that would be softer.  Thats one point.   I also think it allows some optionality during our current period of near-zero interest rates.  We can adjust the quantitative easing program in response to incoming information. Possibly, very possibly, the news will not be good, and we might need to adjust in an upward direction.  Several people here have remarked about all the uncertainty.  I think we all have to keep in mind that theres just a giant amount of uncertainty around any forecast:  It could come in very badly next year, or it could come in very positively.  We dont know.  There are a lot of possibilities out there. Let me say I agree with President YeltsinYeltsin?  [Laughter]  You told that story, and I was going to avoid that.  I agree with President Yellen that we should defend our inflation target on the low side as well as on the high side.  Just because the history of the last 25 years was all about ratcheting down inflation, thats not really the environment that we are in today.  Inflation is very low and maybe threatens to go lower, and we have to keep that in mind and be aggressive and attentive on that. Also, what Im suggesting would take some of the unusual assets off our balance sheet, and I think that that would be helpful.  This institution has not normally held assets like this in the past.  It would be better for the institution and better for Fed independence to get out of the business if we could and if we could do it in a way that would support recovery going forward and would also mitigate interest rate risk problems that may accrue later as rates rise.  Of course, we could also 
          combine asset sales or any kind of asset adjustments with a higher funds rate if that became necessary.  So that would also be on the table.  In particular, if the news came in particularly strong over the next year to 18 months, wed still have that option on the table. So I want to think of the quantitative easing program in terms of fed funds rate equivalence.  When the zero bound is encountered, then you switch to the quantitative policy, which has, according to our estimates, some stimulative impact.  You can think about some kind of mapping that translates that across toif you could lower the fed funds rate further, how much impact would that have. Thats what youre getting out of the quantitative easing program, and thats how you should think about it. Then we would be gradually reducing that accommodation going forward.  For today, I favor alternative B.  I dont have a lot of comments about the text itself, but I do think, as a general comment, that we tend to overemphasize arguments concerning resource slack.  Im not saying that we should put zero emphasis on them, but I think we overemphasize them as causal for inflation.  I know that were going to discuss these issues in more detail at the December meeting, and I think we should just wait until then to get further into those comments.  I like one aspect of alternative C that President Plosser mentioned, which is paragraph 2.  It more accurately reflects that we think inflation is going to stay close to target because we think were going to take the actions that are going to keep inflation close to target.  Instead of leaving us subject to the whims of how the economy is developing going forward, that would better reflect the situation with respect to inflation.  So I like that aspect.  I dont expect us to adopt it today, but thats something to think about going forward.  So thanks very much.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like a couple of others, I would have some preference for alternative C; but this is not the day, and I recognize that.  The reason I have some 
      preference is that I do worry about this environment in which we are at such low rates and we are purchasing assets and sowing the seeds of some future imbalances.  It does significantly rely on a reversing at the right time.  And to the extent that we are prepared to do that, I think the language is good. I would prefer the language sometimes in alternative Cif not today, then at some point as we transition to this. The three factors language is fine.  Im fine with very low as well and also with $175 billion. I am also looking forward to the discussions about how we reverse ourselves and the discussions of asset sales or interest on reserves and how to juxtapose those very hard choices that we have ahead of us, and I think that will be an important part of our future deliberations.  So alternative B, as you are describing it, I think will be the way to go with my preferences noted.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like so many others, I support the policy choice in alternative B.  I interpret this as a stay-the-course option.  For the most part, I support the language in draft alternative B, but I do have some reservations about the changes in paragraph 3 from the September statement. Im not sure I see the benefit of replacing the assertion that the Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for an extended period with the new statement of low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation, and inflation expectations.  I think its generally understood that the conditionality of our decisions is based on resource utilization, inflation, and inflation expectations.  So I think this could be interpreted as trying to emphasize something new by changing the language in this way, and I suspect it could be interpreted as implying increased focus on the unemployment rate, which of course Im sympathetic with as a criterion, but we may very well begin to initiate tightening before 
     theres any substantial improvement in unemployment.  So I think this could serve to confuse more than illuminate. So I dont see a percentage in a lot of forward guidance at this point, and I would prefer simply to stick with the language that we used in September. I am concerned, based on some of my soundings in the financial markets, that were sort of in a strange loop dilemma. Were not ready to initiate tightening, at least through the policy rate, but changes in the extended period language, including maybe even the words around that language, depending on how theyre interpreted, could create an unwanted adjustment in rate levels that would amount to tightening.  So I prefer that we start to signal when were much closer to action. As regards the $175 billion agency debt purchases language, I would have the concern that this could be misinterpreted, but I think the adjustments between the first draft and the draft we have in front of us adequately explain this as very much a technical matter; so it will avoid misinterpretation or overinterpretation.  So Im comfortable with that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.   MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, with a Norwegian mother and Australian father, Im genetically disposed toward alternative C, given that those are the two central banksthe only thing that they had in commonthat recently raised their rates.  But I wont argue for it. I dont think its timely, and I favor alternative B.  I did note in the statement issued yesterday by the Reserve Bank of Australia the following.  It said that it is prudent to lessen gradually the degree of monetary stimulus that was put in place when the outlook appeared to be much weaker.  One of the things I worry about is that we are finding our statements in constant iterations from a period when we feared depression 2.0, deflation 2.0.  What Im hearing at the table, and looking at the estimates of economic growth going forward, is that depression 2.0 is no longer a risk. But I still hearperhaps 
      selectively because I fear it myself and through the retailers that I speak tothat there still is a risk of deflation.  I dont think were out of the woods on that front. So Im encouraged by at least the latter part of Brians presentation.  The alternatives have been laid out.  On that front I would simply say that I would personally be in favor of asset sales first, and I hope we can flesh that out somewhat.  On the other options that have been presented and the way they are being phrased, I would like to consult my team back at home and then perhaps send in a memo, Brian, with some suggestions. I am concerned about the dollar.  Mr. Chairman, you raised this as one of the possible dislocations resulting from low interest rates.  Other people who intervened, Governor Tarullo and others, have mentioned the dollar.  In thinking this through and how we phrase alternative B, I put on my old hat as a foreign exchange adviser, which I did for four years at Brown Brothers advising 
corporations in the late 1970s and early 1980s, certainly different times, as to how treasurers should position themselves and how speculators should position themselves. Were I doing that today, I would be advising, say, a large Russian trader like Vitol, which is the largest speculative oil traderbigger in terms of financial positions in the world than Shell or BPon a dollar play based 
on the language you have in this statement because its not simply the level but also the predictability and duration.  So as an adviser, were I reading that languagethat were going to keep rates exceptionally low for an extended periodto me it would be great kindling wood for the carry trade.  I do believe that thats a risk and a problem right now.  It may be less of a risk for us per se, but if I know that I can borrow dollars cheaply and have this likely for an extended period, Im going to jam as much into the A dollar, as much into the Brazilian real, and as much into these little currencies and move those markets as I can.  I do believe it has something to do with the price of oil. I think in a great deal of the pricing of oil currently, given the excess inventory thats on the 
         seas and given the excess inventory of gas and other alternatives to oil, the dollar is clearly a significant factor. Therefore, my one suggestionwhich I dont think will carry the table, but Im going to put it out there anywayis that, if we do change the term extended period, to change it for some time.  I think that would throw enough uncertainty into those who are pursuing the carry trade and, very importantly, to those corporate treasurers who are not repatriating capital because they find the ability to earn a return here is less than what they can earn somewhere else, and it might mitigate the risk of the kind of dollar crisis that we all fear.  But thats the only suggestion I have, Mr. Chairman, from a practicable standpoint.  Other than that, I would embrace alternative B.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You know, in the old days it wasnt uncommon at this point for the Committee members to begin to say, I agree with the Chairman, and have a pretty quick commentary. But since you dont do it that way, Ill just say that today I agree with President Yellen and Governor Kohn.  The unemployment rate is headed toward 10 percent or above. Inflation by my forecast is well under-running my inflation guideline of 2 percent.  For me this suggests a low likelihood of a policy switch for some time.  Frankly, any tightening of the fed funds rate, for lack of a better policy tool, before June 2010 seems unlikely to me.  Its not a zero probability.  It seems small.  Maybe it will be later, as Governor Kohn said.  I personally find it very difficult to say that, but it could be true.  And this is my view of appropriate policy, by the way, not just a prediction of what the Committee will do.  It is a state-contingent viewpoint, and its not a promise. In terms of the statement language, I think that the statement should provide an accurate description of how we view the risks and the policy markers.  I think the list is good.  President 
   Lacker suggested very low resource utilization.  That could be okay.  Some other possibilities are unusually low, exceptionally low, notably low, and historically low.  If the unemployment rate goes to 8 percent, its still going to be pretty low real resource utilization.  So I dont really think that that has a shocking implication for how policy would change. But that said, our statement is only one form of communication.  You do testimony.  Others do that. We have speeches.  And small changes in language generate phone calls from a number of people who used to be on the Board asking, What does this mean in terms of exceptionally low or just low or something like that?  So there are a lot of different ways that we communicate.  I think that the statement should be descriptive.  I dont think it should necessarily be proscriptive or even prescriptive.  If the events and the risks change and change quickly, policy can change. In summary, Mr. Chairman, I think that policy is likely to stay at low rates for an extended period.  I agree with alternative B. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B.  I think the language in B acknowledges the improvement in economic conditions that we saw last quarter but limits the importance of that information in a way that I think is appropriate. When I read the initial version of alternative B, before we had the benefit of the Bluebooks explanation in which the staff laid out a communication strategy, I was concerned that the public would not understand why we were making this change in the language in paragraph 3 from our September statement around economic conditions.  I was also concerned, as I said earlier, about leading the public to focus on just the three factors that are listed.  I think this new language is more flexible in a constructive way, and yet it is still consistent with the staffs communication strategy that has been laid out. 
      In regard to the communication strategy, I also want to express my appreciation to Brian and the staff for being so responsive to our request that a communication strategy be laid out that will line up with and support our exit strategy.  The sequence of statements that youve given us is very constructive. It will give us time to think about and adjust the language well in advance of our having to take action.  So I just want to thank you for doing that.  It was very helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Ninth District economic conditions are only slightly changed from September.  Nationally, economic conditions are only slightly different from what was forecast in the September Greenbook.  Given these observations, I believe that the FOMC should follow a policy that is consistent with its statement in September, that is, alternative B. Im sympathetic to President Lockharts concerns about the change in languageabout becoming more specific about what economic conditions mean.  Im not sure what has changed economically since September for us to make those changes in wording, and Im worried that market participants might be trying to figure out what we have seen to make us make those changes.  I was very happy to see and impressed by the thoughtful discussion in the Bluebook about future scenarios and language.  I think we need to do more of that going forward. I was concerned, like many others around the table, that the discussion seemed toemphasize the use of asset sales as part of our exit strategy, and my own view is that we should be considering such sales seriously, probably well before we begin to increase the interest rate on reserves.  Asset sales can have significant benefits.  Some of these have been stressed by earlier speakers.  One benefit is, I think, just purely financial.  Our holdings of agency MBS and agency 
               debt imply that were heavily involved in the market for home loans.  When financial markets were functioning poorly, this involvement could be readily justified.  Now financial markets are functioning much better. It is good time for us to reconsider our involvement in housing finance.  Some questions we might ask ourselves along those lines are, Would holding our portfolio to maturity really enhance the liquidity of these markets? Would sales actually do more to help liquidity in these markets? Another benefit, which has not been so much stressed by earlier speakers, has to do with a concern of mine about controlling inflation risk.  On the other side of the balance sheet, our asset holdings imply that banks are holding large amounts of excess reserves.  These reserves represent an inflation risk generated by potential changes in household expectations.  My logic here is fairly simple.  If households believe that the price level is about to rise, then they will demand more-liquid deposits in order to make their transactions.  The fact that banks are holding so much in the way of excess reserves means they can readily accommodate this extra demand for deposits because they have the ability to do so.  The extra deposits in the hands of households become extra money chasing the same amount of goods, which generates inflation.  In this way, excess reserves provide a vehicle for household expectations about inflation to become reality. If you think about this in this quantitative way, the inflationary potential in the system is extraordinary. Banks are currently holding over $1 trillion in excess reserves.  With a reserve requirement of 10 percent, sufficient household demand can generate $10 trillion in liquid deposits in the hands of the public.  Such extra deposits would put enormous pressure on the price level. Why might households expect inflation?  The government debt in the hands of the public has expanded over 30 percent in the past two years.  This debt, as the Chairman and I discussed earlier, can be paid in only two ways: by the Feds printing money or by the Congresss collecting taxes.  If 
      the public starts to believe that the Congress will not collect the required taxes, then the price level must rise either today or in the future.  Again, excess reserves allow these changes in household expectations about fiscal policy to translate very directly into inflationary pressures. Now, I want to be absolutely clear.  I am not arguing that large quantities of excess reserves imply in any way that were guaranteed to have high inflation.  This argument can be wrong empirically and theoretically.  But my concern is that the large quantity of excess reserves makes possible a high inflation outcome.  Like market participants, like the people around this table, I currently view this outcome as being of very low probability.  Recent events have suggested, though, that our conduct of policy should take account of exactly these kinds of low-probability adverse outcomes. So I believe that we need to reduce the amount of excess reserves in the system.  It is clear that we can do so by selling off some of our existing assets.  The Bluebook suggests using temporary absorption techniques such as reverse repos or term deposit facilities.  These approaches certainly work toward ameliorating the kind of problem that Ive described.  However, Im less confident about their ability to eliminate the problem entirely.  These short-term arrangements seem much more vulnerable to sudden shifts in household expectations of the kind that Ive sketched.  Im stressing the benefits of asset sales, and they certainly have costs as well.  My point is simply that I think that, going forward, we need to do some systematic comparisons of the costs and benefits as opposed to simply downplaying their role in our exit strategy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Just a couple of comments.  Saying that reserves facilitate deposits implies that the banks have to lend the money to the consumers. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Yes. 
          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So they are at the moment not lending, as you know, and if they were to lend, it would show up in inflation but also show up in aggregate demand.  So presumably both of our objectives would be moving.  Thus it would be appropriate for us to tighten through interest rates and through other mechanisms in that case. Several people have mentioned asset sales, and I thought President Bullards point about last infirst out was an interesting way to think about it.  I want to point out just the practical point that we are committed now to purchasing through the end of the first quarter.  So to do that, youre essentially putting off any interest rate response until late next year.  That may be the right thing to do, but it may be inconvenient to do it, given that our commitment to purchase goes into next year.  Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me talk about two things with respect to policy: first, the mortgage-backed securities, which have been much discussed, and second, the third paragraph and the suggestions therein.  First, on the MBSno surprise.  Im pleased that were ending and announcing the end of our purchases with respect to both MBS and agency debt.  On the agency debt side, I dont think its likely to be misunderstood or misinterpreted, but back-channel communications there could be constructive.  With respect to the mortgage-backed securities, I think we may well have overstayed and outstayed our welcome, but at least providing clarity that we are at this moment completing our purchases early next year is useful.  It may turn out that rates move even over the intermeeting period, as Brian Sack and Bill Dudley suggested, in anticipation of the end of that program.  I think they are anticipating some move, and from our perspective, its okay. It will be interesting to see what the fiscal and political authorities think about our comfort with that move in thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages and what sorts of responses 
        they either ask of us or ask of themselves there.  As I think we all know, the form and function of the GSEs is likely to get more attention come next year. The exit problems that were talking about with respect to mortgage-backed securities factored into some of our thinking about the purchases after these markets started functioning.  I guess you should add me to the camp of those who are certainly open minded and even forward leaning about thinking about the net benefits of bringing some liquidity and duration back to those markets at the appropriate time, which is not now.  And Mr. Chairman, I think it is at least as important that we dont signal that $1 trillion or $1.25 trillion of MBS are permanently off the market.  I think that is likely to be unconstructive and restricting of our options going forward if markets come to that view.  So not only for our own internal purposes of thinking about it but also given the uncertainties about the mortgage finance market, I think making sure thats one of a number of alternatives that we talk about more publicly at this point would be useful. Turning to policy in the third paragraph, I think that the additions and the including phrase are actually quite useful. They amplify the conditions that underscore our condition-dependent forecast. I noted and giggled like many of you when Brian showed the number of speeches by FOMC members in this intermeeting period, and I guess Id make a couple notes about it.  First, I saw remarkable accord then and, frankly, around this table about the conduct of policy.  I think, with the exception of the President who represents the Game 6 loser of the World Series, [laughter]  MR. PLOSSER.  New York?   MR. WARSH.  that there is at least to this point remarkable accord that rates are low and will need to stay very low for quite some time.  Id say that theres a second bit of agreement among those thirty speeches and that is that we are all very humble about what the risks of that forecast are, 
       very humble and uncertain about the 201011 forecast.  Where there are differences, they are over what we think the risks are when we get ready to change regimes.  What are the risks on the inflation front or on the output front or some other exogenous variable?  And Ive been impressed by the markets through these 30 speeches.  Markets did not bring forward, not even a little bit, the time at which policy could become less accommodative.   What did we see though?  Markets became less certain about the degree of what that move might be, and I think in some ways their variance on the speed of that policy accommodation matches at least what Ive heard today.  I dont view that as a troubling development at all.  I think what were doing in amplifying the economic conditions and referencing utilization, inflation trends, and inflation expectations is making very clear to them that those are uncertainties of ours and theirs, and we arent trying to prejudge what their own judgments on those should be.  So I think that the market for information is improving and will be improved by our being just a little more explicit on those fronts, and I think that variance is, frankly, quite a useful thing. With respect to the question of whether we should use the word including, I do think its useful.  While everything, I suppose, could be reduced to these three phrases that speak to our dual mandate, I wouldnt want markets to have the impression that we are immune to what could be going on in the world geopolitically with respect to the foreign exchange value of the dollar or with respect to asset prices.  So I think it is credibility enhancing to suggest that we understand the uncertainties in this world, and I would strongly support including it.  I dont think that by using the word including were suggesting there is some secret condition that we are hiding from their view.  Its just acknowledging those uncertainties.  With that, I support alternative B as drafted.  While I think it will get a reasonable amount of attention on these three phases, I consider it 
      consistent with intermeeting speeches and also consistent with the discussions weve had today.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke. MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like first to pile a little onto Governor Warshs comments about the mortgage-backed securities market.  The financial improvement does not extend to mortgage instruments.  As recently as the last meeting I was concerned that the lack of a housing finance system would require our continued purchase of the MBS even beyond the first quarter of next year.  Ive thought about this a lot in the intermeeting period, and Ive come to the conclusion that, just as we found with the TALF, there are some markets that our tools cant fix.  I dont see how our economy fully recovers without the true resolution of Fannie and Freddie and clarity in the role of government in housing finance and the structure of private-label loan securitizations.  In my opinion, it is much more important than homebuyer tax credits, but I dont think either our continued purchase or holding of these securities can substitute for such a policy.  With that, I would like to agree with President Evans in his comments, particularly his agreement with President Yellen and Governor Kohn, and support alternative B. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like everybody, I think, I support the policy actions set forth in alternative B.  I do have some concerns about the language, specifically the insertion of the including phrase at the beginning of paragraph 3.  I didnt have those concerns when Brian circulated the language.  I didnt have those concerns after Brian explained to me why the language is in there.  But after this meeting, I do have them, [laughter] and let me explain why. Firstthis is a secondary point, but I will mention itI am somewhat bemused by the inflation expectations criterion.  For a social scientist to put such weight on such a slippery metric, 
          whose relationship to outcomes historically is, as I understand it, not particularly well established empirically has just surprised mesomething that I hadnt focused on before being on the Board.  Thats something that I look forward to hearing more about in the December meeting, when we have a full presentation of the academic work behind inflation more generally. I understand that faith and intuition are important elements in economic policy making.  So in and of itself, that concern wouldnt have moved me to speak.  I guess where I do have a concern is on the issue of what this phrase will communicate.  This is going to be the news out of this statement.  Everything else is expected.  Some of the things that some people expected to be in here are not going to be in here, and therefore, this is going to be the only thing for people to focus on. To the extent that the including phrase is understood as a positive statement of the principal factors that the 17 people around the table will be looking at over the coming meetings, I think that would enhance communications, and I took it that that was the reason it was included in the statement originally.  But unlike Kevin, I didnt find the 30 speeches a wholly positive and productive development after the last FOMC meeting.  My own sense from talking to a number of market actors was that they thought that there was confusion within the Committee, which they thought undermined within a very short period of time the FOMC statement itself.  I dont think it was serious, and I think people kind of bounced back, and some of the sophisticated analysts did a very nice job on our behalf of teasing out the points of agreement and putting them out to markets more generally.  But just having listened to the conversation, I am concerned that the release of this statement with the including phrase will be quickly followed by a litigation of the meaning and relative importance of each of these three items in a series of public statements, and when some people start making the public statements, other people are going to be moved to make public statements that kind of go a bit on the other side.  Therefore, I am concerned that what began as a 
     nicely stated, positive assertion of the principal factors that we all, some of us more than others, will be looking at will fairly quickly devolve into a bit of cacophony. Now, it may be that markets will just look at who the speakers are and say, Okay.  Well, this is nothing new from this person, and so it wont be that serious.  But to the degree that what were looking for in the next three, four, five, six meetings is the capacity to speak more or less with one voice on how we plan to move ahead and eventually how we plan to exit, I fear that were setting a not-terrific precedent for our capacity to do so.  And so, Mr. Chairman, although I certainly wouldnt even dream of opposing alternative B if you choose to keep the language in, I guess my own preference would have been to hold this language until perhaps the December meeting, after weve had a chance to talk about at least the inflation considerations in a bit more detail, in the hopes that the positive statement at that time would reflect a greater level of consensus among the seventeen of us.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I think that people have raised important points, that the changes in the language will be noted, and that people will be trying to parse out what those changes in the language mean.  There is some risk associated with that, especially given the fact that the public knows pretty clearly that we are also contemplating the broader question of the possible sequence of our statement language over time.  That said, I think the changes themselves are pretty innocuous, and my view would be that there is a little risk there.  I think I know which direction the market will move in response to them, but my judgment would be that they are small rather than they are large.  The first change just clarifies what the conditioning factors are in terms of our view of exceptionally low for an extended period, and the second change is really just explaining what we are actually 
  planning to do on agency debt. I dont think we really have an alternative to that, because if we kept in the up to $200 billion, what would we do at the next meeting? What would we do at the meeting after that?  At some point we would be saying right before the program ends that we are doing up to $200 billion, but were not. We are doing $175 billion.  So I think that one we just have to do to clarify the direction. In terms of the discussions of asset sales, I think the issue of sequencein what order you do thingsas we exit is hugely important.  I am not pre-committed to any ordering.  I certainly want to hear all of the arguments, but I dont agree at all that asset sales would be gentle to the market at this time.  I think asset sales to the market at this time would be completely ungentle, especially given the primary dealer survey results, which showed fewer than 50 percent thought that we would ever do asset sales.  I think it is an open-ended question, isnt it, Brian?  So to go from something that we would never do to something that we would do 
first, I think we have to do a lot of explaining and conditioning for the market to understand that it was not a big deal. So if we decide to go down that path, weve got a lot of work to do with the market participants before we do it. I just want to talk a bit about the possible sequence of actions going forward.  One thing we dont ever really have detailed discussions about is what the language means, and I think you have to understand what the language means before you decide when you need to change the language. I have asked a bunch of people about what these words mean, just to get a sense of what the common understanding is. And there isnt one.  But I am going to throw out as a strawman my view of what the words mean, because that will then condition when you might want to actually change these words. 
 My view is that extended means that no tightening is likely for more than six months, so the time frame is pretty far out.  So in making the consideration today whether I want to include the extended language, I have to think about whether it is likely that I am going to want to tighten monetary policy in the next six months.  And given my forecast, I dont see that as likely. I am with Governor Kohn.  I dont see us tightening in 2010.  I think we are going to talk a lot about it, but I dont think we are going to do it for a very long time.  The for some time language, rather than the extended period, implies to me no tightening for three months or more.  We are not going to tighten at the next meeting.  It is possible that we could tighten the meeting after that, but that is sort of the frontier.  And the before long language seems to me to be signaling that we are likely to tighten at the next meeting, in fact. Now, what gets confusing is when we use two things together, as in alternative C in Brians handout. We removed the word exceptional and changed it to low levels of the funds rate, and we also changed the timing from extended period to for some time.  I think that is going to be totally confusing to the market.  I think the market would actually take that as that we are tightening at the next meeting.  We are moving from exceptionally low to low immediately, and then we are going to stay at low for a meeting or two.  So I think we have to be very careful when we change the language that we change one element, not two simultaneously.  Then, I think we will get ourselves in a lot of trouble.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Well, most people supported the actions in alternative B. That is my preference as well.  Let me talk about some of the issues of language that were raised and see if we have any desire to make changes.  I dont think anybody at all mentioned the first paragraph, which is a first.  So perhaps forget that for now.  On the second paragraph, there were a couple of suggestions to substitute the language in paragraph 2 of 
alternative C. I think it would be risky to do that.  I would note one logical issue, which is that the C (2) language suggests a somewhat different conditionality, which is that policy will be focused on price stability, which it certainly will be, but it would be kind of strange to introduce conditionality in two places with a somewhat different mix of factors.  But I recognize that issue. So now lets go to the third paragraph, where the main concerns are.  To avoid for a moment the most important sentence, one or two folks had concerns about being explicit about the $175 billion. The Vice Chairman suggested that we have to do it in order to be transparent.  Could I maybe ask Brian Madigan and Brian Sack or anyone else if they have any thoughts on the market impact of this statement?   MR. MADIGAN. Go ahead, Brian. MR. SACK. Well, we did reach out and take a poll of various players in the agency debt market.  It seems as though the expectations are generally between $175 billion and $200 billion, maybe a touch higher than we had been thinking, so I think there is a modest surprise here.  But it is modest.  I wouldnt worry about it. Could agency spreads back up a little? Sure. Will there be a lot of talk about why and what this means? Yes, absolutely. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The concernwe tried to respond to President Yellens suggestionwas to make sure that nobody confused this with an intentional tightening.  And I guess I would like reassurance that we have explained what we are doing here.  Right? MR. MADIGAN. I agree. I think our sense is that overall the statement is not likely to have much of a market impact. MR. SACK. Right. And we changed the language exactly to accomplish that, to convey that this is consistent with what we have been doing already. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Vice Chairman. 
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. If there is starting to be a reaction to this, there may be some value to having a background conversation to make it clear that this is not a change.  I wouldnt do it beforehand because we dont know that we have a problem.  But if the market does take it the wrong way, which I think is a low probability, you might want to have a background conversation. MR. LACKER. Or we can make 30 speeches. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is probably not sufficient.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  So lets go to the main sentence, which is about the extended period. First, a couple of comments.  I do think we need to maintain the extended period for now. I think most of the people around the table agreed with that, given the macro outlook. I am sensitive to President Fishers comments about the carry trade.  In fact, I tried to underline those issues when I gave my own remarks.  President Fisher, you had asked Nathan yesterday about this issue, and he pointed out that there is a good carry trade and a bad carry trade. The good carry trade is the appropriate response of asset prices to low interest rates essentially, and that shows up in exchange rates.  It shows up in other asset prices as well.  The bad carry trade is when people behave as if they know for sure that interest rates will be low forever and exchange rates will be stable, or at least they go in a one-way direction.  I have always had difficulty with the latter because it is not an arbitrage.  It is an irrational response.  But all I can say is that this is something we really do need to pay attention to.  I agree with that, and I mentioned this in my remarks.  So it is a concern, but we also have our macroeconomic concerns. President Fisher.  
    MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I simply wanted to point that out.  It is not clear to me, if we were to have a run on the dollar in an intermeeting period, what we would do.  Would we raise interest rates? What would we do?  So all I am saying is that we might consider this.  I am not going to argue for it. I dont think it is going to carry, but I just wanted to be sensitive to it.  About the only thing we can do is the way we express ourselves, to say or to have the Secretary of the Treasury sayas every Secretary, not just Tim, has said foreverI believe in a strong dollar policy. That doesnt sound anymore in the marketplace.  It has been said so many times by so many people it just doesnt ring.  So I wonder what we would do under these circumstances, and the only point I wanted to make is, if we are worried about this, if we are at a tipping point or when we get to that, that maybe a little language change might help because it takes away the permanence.  It shortens and builds a lexicon for the period, but I dont want to 
make too big a deal out of it.  I am concerned about it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think there are various language things that policymakers, including myself, President Trichet, and others, could use to address this to some extent more credibly. Of course, we dont want to talk about this hereit is a bad wordbut there is always intervention, which seems to have an effect. Okay. So on the sentenceGovernor Tarullo, I think, raised the possibility of delaying the conditionality. I thought most people were in favor of taking this step.  Are there others who are concerned?  I recognize that any change is risky, but we cant avoid the risk.  At some point 
we have to move in a direction.  Maybe this is not the right moment.  But is there anyone else who is concerned? MR. LOCKHART. I spoke against it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart, thats right.  Yes, sorry. 
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I spoke against it, too. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. So we have some.  I think, though, that the majority are stillI think there is a bit of risk, but VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There is a bit of risk, but there is always going to be risk when we change language. The problem with that, of course, is that we lock ourselves into the statement more and more, which then makes it even a bigger risk when we change language.  So its a very bad dynamic. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thats right. That was part of the way I was thinking about this. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. For me it would be helpful to hear an explanation why it is now suddenly so useful to be so specific as opposed to in the past.  That is something I dont understand. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The reason is, essentially, that what we have now is interpreted as a sort of an unconditional commitment toeven though we say economic conditions will warrant it seems like an unconditional commitment to hold rates for six months or more, as the Vice Chairman was saying.  I think doing this helps to emphasize the conditionality of our commitment, so that we would be able to change if economic conditions changed notably. And although there may be some adverse reaction because people think this is a step to exitI think thats a riskit will also be an increase in clarity and transparency.  Yes, Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Just to clarify or to restate what I said earlier, I agree with Bill Dudley.  I think that, all things considered, sooner rather than later is actually better because you are not locked in. But the risk associated with the statement is not simply a function of the statement 
itself on the day it is released. And that was the pointwe are in a position to minimize the riskiness associated with the statement, and I would just urge everybody to bear that in mind, particularly over the next 72 hours. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Im having a hard time appreciating in some precise way what we mean by the risk in terms of this language.  I understand that markets react to every change that we 
make, and then sometimes the reaction is undone.  Sometimes it changes things.  But I am of the opinion that, when we have a pretty good approach to monetary policy, we are pretty forthright in describing what we are doing. Markets somehow figure out what we are doing, and these are well within the lines in terms of those types of changes. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think the risk is that the markets will move forward the tightening path, which I dont think is consistent with expectations in most of the Committee. MR. EVANS. Then, you go out and somebody talks and somebody really important talks and it gets clarified.  When people rely extraordinarily on the statement, then we begin to feel locked in. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The counterargument is that we can only put this off.  All right, recognizing that there is some risk, we will have to see what happens. The last question I want to ask was raised by President Lacker first, and I think others, which is the phrase low rates of resource utilization.  Now, ironically, the reason that I was in favor of dropping very was in deference to President Lacker.  [Laughter]  I thought that it would be a concern that we could measure output gaps, distinguish between the output gaps that are very large and just ordinarily large.  In that spirit, I was concerned that adding very would 
  then create a cottage industry, figuring out the dividing line between very and not so very.  That was part of my concern.  I can be persuaded if the Committee approves that. But the other possibility I would just raise would be that this sentence very much echoes the terms in paragraph 2.  Paragraph 2 already refers to longer-term inflation expectations being stable and inflation being subdued.  And I think it actually elaborates because it talks about longer-term inflation expectations and about forward-looking inflation projections.  So in that spirit, it wouldnt be particularly elegant, but we could replace low rates of resource utilization with substantial resource slack, if that was preferred.  Someone liked that. MR. PLOSSER. I like low rates of. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You like low rates of utilization. 
MR. PLOSSER. Better than resource slack. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. All right. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. That is more an output gap idea, I think.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I would point out there is going to be a cottage industry no matter what. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. 
MR. LACKER. The question is, What is the object of their endeavors in their cottages?  [Laughter] So they are going to be focusing on low versus very low.  It seems as though very low is the right thing to focus their attention on.  It seems like a more accurate characterization. MR. TARULLO. This, again, seems to me to be pre-judging rather than to have a criterion, which is, just to reiterate, what my concern is about this whole endeavor. MR. PLOSSER. But they speculate that on what we mean anyway.  
     MR. LACKER. Well, I would just reiterate that we are conveying a set of conditions under which we anticipate retaining low rates, and narrowing that range of conditions only reduces the amount of pre-commitment.  So it makes it a more inclusive, broader, weaker, statement in some sense.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it makes it a stronger statement because it could mean that, even if inflation is low and expectations of inflation are low, that if unemployment falls below 8 percent, then well start to move, which might be possible but I wouldnt want to commit to that. MR. LACKER. I go back to the way the sentence reads.  It doesnt say only if economic conditions are.  It just says if.  It is if this, then lowit doesnt say if not this, then raising rates. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think that is how it would be interpreted.  Okay. I will try both possible options.  If there is not majority support, we will just stay with what we have. So, first, I didnt see much support for substantial resource slack.  Was there anybody? Nobody wants to support that. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Groundswell. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Groundswell is supported.  All right. Well be democratic.  What is the view on very?  Who favors very? Anyone else? All right. So I think we have about as much of a consensus as we can get.  Well, having gone through this at some length, we have ended up with the status quo. [Laughter]  Any further comments or thoughts on B? All right.  Again, I appreciate the commentary.  I think the points that were raised in the policy round, considering not only todays statement but also about how we will exit and how we 
  will communicate it, are very important.  And, of course, the staff will continue to work on both the policy regime and the communication associated with it. If you will call the roll, please, Matt. MR. LUECKE. This vote will encompass the alternative B policy statement on page 3 of the packet on monetary policy alternatives, as well as the directive for alternative B on page 9 of that same packet.  Chairman Bernanke  Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes Governor Kohn  Yes President Lacker  Yes President Lockhart  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes President Yellen   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you very much.  I remind you that the revised projections, if you want to make revisions based on information known as of today, are due by 5:00 p.m. tomorrow.  And I remind you that the next meeting is December 15 and 16.  After the meeting is adjourned, there will be lunch available in the Anteroom, and Linda  Robertson will give us an update on congressional developments.  Meeting adjourned. END OF MEETING 
               
   _______________   Attended Tuesdays session only. Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 1516, 2009 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 15, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, December 16, 
2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Ms. Duke 
Mr. Evans 
Mr. Kohn 
Mr. Lacker 
Mr. Lockhart 
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh 
Ms. YellenMr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Mr. Luecke, Assistant SecretaryMr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Mr. Sheets, Economist Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors 
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
  
   
      
 
    
_______________      Attended Tuesdays session only. 
 Attended the portion of the meeting related to inflation dynamics.  Attended Wednesdays session only.Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Ms. Zickler, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mr. Bassett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Mr. Roberts, Section Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  Governors Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively 
Mr. Krane, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Schweitzer and Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis, respectively Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Messrs. Clark, Dotsey, Fernald, Hornstein, Olivei, and Wynne, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Richmond, Boston, Dallas, respectively  
  _______________    Attended the portion of the meeting related to inflation dynamics. Messrs. Friedman and van der Klaauw, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mr. Martinez-Garcia, Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
                                                       1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on December 1516, 2009 December 15, 2009Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody. PARTICIPANTS. Good afternoon. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We need a motion to close our meeting. MR. KOHN. So moved. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Our meeting today and tomorrow follows the basic sequence weve been having recently, but with an important addition, which is that we have a staff presentation on inflation dynamics.  We need about two hours for that presentation, I understand, and weve thought about it and decided to put it at the end of the meeting so we would have plenty of time to complete our policy decision.  But I hope that people will pay 
attention to the time and make sure we have enough time tomorrow to give appropriate attention 
to the presentation. In that spirit, why dont we start directly?  Mr. Sack. MR. SACK.1  Since the last FOMC meeting, financial conditions have generally become more supportive of economic growth. Yields have declined at short- and intermediate-term maturities, and equity prices have posted a solid gain, while the dollar has remained about unchanged on net.  Some of the adjustment in financial markets appears to have been driven by increased confidence among investors that short-term interest rates will remain low.  The repetition of the extended period language in the November FOMC statement, along with the additional clarity provided by including explicit conditioning factors, seemed to solidify investors expectations that policy would remain on hold.  Subsequent speeches by FOMC members, including comments that U.S. asset prices do not look obviously out of line with fundamentals, were seen as providing further support to that view. In response, the expected path of monetary policy derived from futures quotes shifted down as much as 35 basis points over the intermeeting period, as shown in the upper left panel. 
       The Bluebook noted that these futures rates overstate what investors see as the most likely path for short-term interest rates, because they are influenced by the distribution of risks around that outcome.  This point can be made by looking at options prices to derive the perceived probabilities of different outcomes for the short-term interest rate, as shown in the distribution to the right.  According to that exercise, the most likely outcome for the three-month LIBOR rate about ten months 
from now is that it will remain in the 25 to 50 basis point range.  However, given the proximity of that outcome to the zero bound, the risk is skewed almost completely in 
the direction of higher rates, pulling the mean of the distribution well above the mode.  As a result, the futures price, which corresponds to the mean, is about 50 basis points above what is seen as the most likely outcome. With this consideration, there does not appear to be much discrepancy left between market-based measures of policy expectations and survey responses, if the latter captures the modal outcome seen by respondents.  Our primary dealer survey indicates that the median respondent expects the first tightening to occur in the fourth quarter of 2010, with a range of views that spanned from the second quarter of 2010 to early 2012. We also used the survey to query dealers about their interpretation of the extended period language used in the FOMC statement.  By far, the most common response was that the extended period language would be removed three meetings before an actual rate hike. We are happy to use future versions of the survey to quantify any timing of policy tightening that you wantsuch as some time, a while, before long, or, maybe to accommodate some Committee members, immediately. [Laughter] The lower expected path of monetary policy contributed to a decline in shorter-term Treasury yields.  This adjustment occurred even though the incoming economic data were generally stronger than anticipated.  As shown in the middle left panel, the two-year yield fell about 10 basis points, on net, while the 10-year yield posted a small increase.  At one point over the intermeeting period, the 2-year yield had dipped to 65 basis pointsessentially equaling the lowest level on record, as shown in the 
middle right panelalthough it has more recently retraced back above 80 basis points. The 10-year yield, at just over 3.5 percent, is also low by historical standards, though it is still well above the levels reached at the end of last year.   Yields remain at these low levels despite the fact that inflation concerns seem to be lingering. Some market participants continue to discuss whether the accommodative monetary policy stance and expansionary fiscal policy will 
eventually lead to upward inflation pressure.  Consistent with those concerns, the 5-year, 5-year forward break-even inflation rate remains near the upper end of the range observed in recent years, as shown in the bottom left panel. 
       While we recognize that technical factors can affect break-even rates, it seems that perceptions of inflation risk have at least contributed to their recent patterns.  Several observations support that view. First, flows into mutual funds that invest in inflation-linked products have increased notably over the course of 2009, indicating elevated demand for inflation protection among retail investors.  Second, investors in the swaption market are paying an increasingly large premium for protection against a rise in longer-term interest rates, which could in part reflect concerns about inflation expectations moving higher.  However, some of the other patterns associated with inflation jitters, such as rising gold prices and a falling dollar, have reversed course in recent weeks.  We will be watching closely to see if that reversal is a temporary head fake or a more persistent shift in trend.  Looking across global sovereign debt markets, we find that another factor that has recently come into play is the perceived risk of default.  Given the fiscal challenges facing a wide range of countries, investors have been reevaluating their views on sovereign default risk. One measure of this risk, albeit an imperfect one because of the limited size of the market, is the pricing of CDS on sovereign debt.  As shown to the right, there has been considerable upward pressure on the yields of Greek debt as markets have grown concerned about the prospect of default.  Similar concerns have been expressed about Spain and Ireland, and the fiscal situations in the U.S. and the U.K. have also been discussed in this context.  However, to date there appears to have 
been little upward pressure on U.S. yields from this factor. Overall, any upward pressure on Treasury yields arising from investors concerns about longer-term inflation risks or the fiscal outlook is being dominated by the downward pressure arising from the prospect of low short-term interest rates for an extended period, leaving Treasury yields quite low. Turning to the next exhibit, better economic news and the prospect of accommodative short-term interest rates contributed to a further advance in the prices 
of some risky assets.  Most notably, broad equity indexes posted another sizable gain since the last FOMC meeting, with the S&P 500 index up more than 5 percent on net. One of the issues that I have addressed in recent briefings is whether risky asset prices have risen too far. To help make this judgment, we can look to valuation models, such as the Boards measure of the equity premium.  This premium, shown to 
the right, still appears wide by historical standards, suggesting that the run-up in equity prices since earlier this year has not pushed them too high relative to fundamentals.  Similarly, an analysis of corporate bond spreads suggests that their risk premiums are also not unusually narrow. Another approach to address this issue is to look across asset classes in order to see if all risky assets are rising, as such a pattern could imply an indiscriminate increase in risk tolerance on the part of investors.  Correlations in the movements across various asset classes, reported in the middle left panel, have been unusually high over the past six months, compared with their levels a few years ago, with 
         increasing equity prices strongly associated with rising emerging market equity prices, rising commodity prices, and declining corporate yield spreads.  To be sure, this pattern could result from a variety of factors, such as the considerable change in the economic outlook and the easing in financing strains.  However, some might take this pattern as indicative of a large shift in risk preferences that, if carried too far, could be associated with speculative excesses. The current intermeeting period provides some relief from this pattern, though.  Even though equity prices charged ahead, they did not pull all risky asset prices with them.  Indeed, corporate bond spreads, shown to the right, appear to have leveled out to a considerable degree. Moreover, yield spreads on commercial mortgage-backed securities, the bottom left panel, have widened since the summer, and ABS spreads across most other asset classes have also edged higher recently.  Thus, the performance of risky assets has been mixed.  In addition, even though the events associated with the debt standstill by Dubai World were not a primary driver of these price movements, they provided a reminder to investors of the need to assess credit risk and differentiate across borrowers. Banks, in particular, continue to be wary of taking additional credit risk onto their balance sheets. They have continued to tighten the terms on many types of lending, and the volume of bank loans has continued to contract.  These patterns contrast sharply with the narrowing of credit spreads in capital markets since earlier this year and the robust issuance of corporate bonds that has taken place in recent months.  Bank equity prices, shown in the bottom right panel, were mixed over the intermeeting period.  The recent focus of the market has been on the efforts by Bank of America, Citigroup, and Wells Fargo to repay TARP funds, as investors weigh the advantages of escaping TARP against the dilutive effects of the capital increases required to do so. The next exhibit addresses the Feds large-scale asset-purchase programs.  The Desk has been tapering its purchases of MBS and agency debt, as shown in the top two panels. But despite the slower pace, our purchases continue to put pressure on these markets.  The available supply of MBS in the market has been limited, as 
seasoned bonds seem to be largely locked up in portfolios and new originations have been relatively light. Given these market dynamics, our purchases have produced a further richening of MBS and agency debt relative to Treasury securities, as can be seen in the yield spreads shown in the middle panels.  Indeed, the concern among market participants that these spreads would widen as the Fed pulled back from its purchase programs has not yet materialized.  Market participants continue to raise this concern, however, with many expressing a view that the MBS spread to Treasuries could quickly rise by 25 to 50 basis points from its current level.  Accordingly, we will continue to watch for such developments as our purchases decline further. 
     Of course, winding down our purchases of assets is just one dimension of managing our balance sheet.  The evolution of financial market conditions will depend on all decisions influencing the size and composition of the balance sheet going forward. In that regard, the Committee faces a key policy issue, namely, setting the appropriate strategy for either redeeming or reinvesting maturing SOMA holdings.  Like asset sales, redemptions of SOMA assets allow policymakers to shrink the balance sheet, simultaneously reducing excess reserves and reversing some of the portfolio-balance effects that resulted from the LSAP programs.  This outcome may be seen as desirable, depending on the evolution of economic and financial conditions. The figure in the bottom left panel shows the profile of remaining maturities for our holdings of Treasury and agency securities as well as the pattern of principal payments that we anticipate on our holdings of MBS.  The MBS profile is based on a prepayment model that incorporates a market-based forecast of interest rates, and it should be noted that there is a considerable amount of uncertainty surrounding those estimates.  Those MBS payments would come on top of the nearly $50 billion of 
prepayments that we have already experienced to date, and which we have not reinvested. The table in the bottom right panel shows the path of the size of the Feds balance sheet under several possible redemption strategies.  The first row assumes full reinvestment of all SOMA securities, which would require the LSAPs to be expanded to replace the MBS prepayments and agency debt maturities already received.  This strategy would leave the size of the portfolio steady at $2.2 trillion through 2011.  The second row assumes that the Desk redeems all agency securities that mature and all MBS that are prepaid, while following its usual practice of reinvesting Treasury 
holdings. This strategy allows the balance sheet to shrink gradually, providing about $350 billion of redemptions (relative to the full reinvestment strategy) by the end of 2011. The third row shows the effects of redeeming all SOMA holdings, including Treasury securities. This strategy reduces the balance sheet by over $500 billion by the end of 2011. Of course, other strategies could also be used under which only a portion of the Treasury portfolio would be reinvested. At this point, the Desk only seeks to verify the Committees preference to allow MBS and agency debt to run off the balance sheet without replacement.  As noted, 
this is the approach that has been taken to date with the prepayment of MBS, and it is the approach that was taken with the agency debt security that matured on December 10, the first security purchased under the LSAP programs to mature.  Going forward, the flow of maturing agency securities and prepaid MBS will become more substantial, adding to the importance of deciding upon the redemption strategy. Reaching a decision for handling Treasury securities is less pressing, as the Desk has a long-standing practice of routinely reinvesting existing Treasury holdings and 
         can continue to do so for now. However, policymakers may want to revisit the redemption strategy for Treasury securities before long, as it gives them more scope to achieve different balance sheet outcomes. Your final exhibit covers the behavior of short-term interest rates and discusses the markets views on some of the Feds exit tools.  As shown in the upper left panel, the Feds balance sheet expanded modestly since the last FOMC meeting, reflecting further increases in our asset holdings accumulated under the LSAP programs.  The balance sheet currently stands at $2.2 trillion, with $1.8 trillion of that corresponding 
to our holdings of Treasury, agency, and mortgage-backed securities. Partly as a result of the growth of the balance sheet, the amount of excess reserves in the banking system has also increased and currently stands at about $1.1 trillion, as shown to the right. With that large amount of liquidity in the system, the federal funds rate has remained persistently below the interest rate paid on excess reserves, or the IOER rate. It is useful to look at this relationship between excess reserves and the federal funds rate as a scatter plot, shown in the middle left panel for the period since last December.  As can be seen, there has been a downward slope to the relationship, although it is very small in magnitude.  When excess reserve balances were around $600 billion, the spread between the federal funds rate and the IOER rate tended to be limited.  As reserves have increased towards and now beyond $1 trillion, the spread has grown to a typical level of 10 to 15 basis points.  Of course, a key area of uncertainty that policymakers face is the extent to which this relationship will shift as the IOER rate increases. Given the large amounts of reserves and the behavior of short-term interest rates, market participants are increasingly asking for more information about the FOMCs 
exit strategy. They are particularly focused on the likelihood, sequencing, and size of various policy actions, such as draining reserves, increasing the IOER rate, and selling assets. We asked a number of questions in our dealer survey to gauge their own views on these issues. The survey results indicate that about three-quarters of the respondents expected the Fed to use temporary reserve-draining tools, either reverse repos or term deposits, before any increases in the policy rate. The remainder expected reserve draining and policy rate increases to begin at the same time, and no respondents expected the policy rate to be raised before any draining operations took place.  Based on the median of all responses, the initial use of reverse repos and term deposits was expected to take place in the third quarter of 2010, while the first policy tightening was expected to take place in the fourth quarter, as noted earlier in the briefing. Some additional information on the expected path of these tools is presented in the lower left panel. As can be seen, reverse repos and term deposits are both expected to ramp up through the second quarter of 2011 and to edge up further into 
       2012. By the middle of 2012, the respondents expected about $300 billion of outstanding reverse repurchase agreements and $200 billion of term deposits.  About half of the respondents also expected asset sales to be used, bringing the average expected path of sales above zero. However, as can be seen, asset sales were expected to be increased more slowly.  Lastly, about half of the respondents also expected SFP balances to be raised from their current level and hence to remove reserves.  Based on the use of all of these tools, respondents on average expected the FOMC to drain several hundred billion dollars of reserves before the first policy tightening, leaving the amount of excess reserves at that time below $1 trillion.  However, as shown by the distribution in the bottom right panel, there is a fairly wide range of views on that outcome.  Respondents also expected the FOMC to continue draining reserves even after an increase in the policy rate, but their responses suggest that a decent amount of excess reserves would still be left in the system through at least 2012. Let me close with a brief note about year-end effects, which are not covered in your charts. We continue to monitor year-end pressures and the potential consequences for markets.  As I discussed in my last briefing, we are not seeing any upward pressure on unsecured lending across year-end, the traditional year-end effect in markets, presumably as a result of the substantial amount of liquidity in the markets.  Instead, year-end pressures seem to be most evident in strong demand for risk-free assets spanning year-end, which has put significant downward pressure on short-term Treasury yields.  For example, the implied forward rate from Treasury bills for the week spanning year-end has been consistently negative for several months, and last weeks auction of the four-week bills stopped out at a rate of precisely 0. However, the downward pressure on rates does not appear to be intensifying or causing significant market disruption, and thus does not clearly necessitate a policy response. One development that could alleviate some of the market pressure is issuance of SFP bills ahead of year-end.  If the debt ceiling is increased soon by a sizable amount, 
the Treasury will likely auction SFP bills in the last week of the year.  Those auctions would be part of a broader plan to return SFP balances to $200 billion.  However, given the politics surrounding the debt limit decision, this outcome is, at best, uncertain at this point. Thank you.  That concludes my prepared comments. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Brian, youre right that we need to be thinking as a Committee about the sequencing of how we will remove the policy accommodation.  My thought on this had been that we needed to wait until we had a somewhat clearer idea of what the timing of the availability of the tools was going to be.  Im asking Brian Sack and Brian 
  Madigan, whom I have not warned about this questiondo you think that January might be a time when we could at least begin a discussion on this at the Committee level?  Will we have enough information about our tools? MR. SACK. Yes, I think well have enough information.  There will certainly be details about the tools that were still working out, but I think well have some information on their scope. For reverse repos, in particular, we essentially already have the capacity to do the amount of reserve draining that was indicated in the survey.  So I wouldnt argue for putting off that more strategic debate in order to hammer out every last detail of the tools. I think its probably time to move forward with that. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So no later than January we will put this on the agenda for discussion. MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. MR. PLOSSER. I think it is important to do that in January.  But I would just like to emphasize that, in the context of that and thinking about sequencing, I think it would also be very helpful to think about what we believe the steady-state policy tools are going to be; that is, how are we going to conduct policy in normal times going forward with interest on reserves?  And, I think it is important to have that discussion, but in the context of thinking about how we use the tools, and the way we use these tools, interacts with where we ultimately want to end up in how we conduct policywhether it is a floor system or a corridor systemand what we think is going to happen to the funds market.  I think these things are tied together, and Id like to see that discussion carried on in tandem if we can. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The point is well taken.  I guess I would say that, given all of these important decisions, maybe we should all try to minimize excessive speculation in public about this subject until we as a Committee have come to more clarity on sequencing.  But these are issues we need to address very soon. So thank you for that. On the issue of reinvestment, let me just add this one other option I can think of, which is to reinvest in bills. This gives you maximum flexibility if you want to drain quickly. Are you looking for some kind of Committee guidance at this point, or are you going to come back to us? MR. SACK. I would just like to make sure that everyone is on board with running down the agency and MBS holdings, or at least doing that as an interim strategy.  In terms of a strategy for the entire portfolio or a strategy to be used beyond the near term, I think that, yes, we should come back and have a full discussion and one that probably to some degree folds in the issue of asset sales, because obviously redemptions accomplish many of the things that asset sales accomplish. One way to think about the redemption strategy is that it is in some sense a commitment strategy to convince the markets that you are not going to shed your portfolio too quickly.  So one question I think we should consider is:  If there are other ways to make that commitment, then do asset sales give us more flexibility? Obviously what is somewhat odd about redemptions is the flip side of that, which is that this decision about how quickly to shrink the portfolio is governed by other factors that are uncertain and that could change and so on.  So I would like to give it full consideration, along with the discussion of whether there is any strategy through which we could sell assets safely in some regard. 
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, again, use of bills could smooth out the path if you thought the redemptions were too quick, for example. MR. SACK. Absolutely. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If anyone has concerns about letting things mature as an interim strategy, you should mention that in our discussion. Before I open the floor for questions for Brian, the Vice Chairman had an introduction he would like to make. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I wanted to introduce Steve Friedman from the Markets Group in New York. Steve runs the forex area.  So hes partners in crime with Mr. Sheets on 
swaps and other things. Welcome, Steve. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Welcome.  Okay. Questions or comments for Brian? Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, on panel 29, the orange line for asset salesthat is understood by dealers to be sales and not just the runoff through maturation of these securities? MR. SACK. Thats correct, though I think one shortcoming of the survey as we designed it is that we didnt actually ask about redemptions, so I think we will do that in the future.  But this question was phrased to be explicitly about sales.  A few dealers volunteered views on redemptions under the category of other, but I think in the future well be more careful about trying to get their views on their expectations about the redemption strategy. MR. TARULLO. All right. I think you just answered my next question, which is:  At this juncture youre not certain as to what the dealer views are on what our redemption default position is? 
 MR. SACK. I would strongly guess that the consensus expectation is that the agency and MBS will be run off and the Treasuries will be reinvested, but Ill have more confidence in that if we measure it in the next survey. MR. TARULLO. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN. Just a question on panel 28. Is the policy rate that theyre talking about there the fed funds rate or the interest rate on reserves? MR. SACK. Its the federal funds rate.  I think its likely that market participants see those two, the federal funds rate target and the IOER rate, moving in tandem.  But again, we didnt explicitly get that from the surveythe survey asks about timing of policy tightening in terms of an increase in the federal funds rate target. MR. ROSENGREN. So no dealer raised the question of whether you would just move the interest rate on reserves but not do anything else, for example? MR. SACK. They did not. But again, I think we could incorporate that in future surveys.  I also think that, if were very interested in gauging the markets views on all of these issues obviously there may be a few survey issues to clean upwe also might want to consider doing a broader survey. This is a survey of the 18 primary dealers.  Its answered mainly by the economists at those primary dealers.  Were not convinced that they have the same views as the traders or as a broader set of financial firms.  So if there is a lot of interest in gauging these expectations, I think we could make a more extensive effort for the next meeting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. 
    MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wondered, Brian, if you could talk a little bit about the CMBS market and the TALF, and particularly new CMBS.  I guess the issuance has been limited under the TALF.  Why is that, and what are the prospects? MR. SACK. As you know, the November TALF subscription included the first new-issue CMBS deal, the DDR deal.  That seemed to have some positive effect on the market, even though we ended up taking only a small amount of risk, I think, on the portfoliothe amount of the loan was only $72 million.  The deal was very well received and seemed to initiate some activity in the market.  Since then weve seen two other new single-borrower issues come to market. MR. KOHN. Through TALF? 
MR. SACK. No, not through TALF, outside of TALF.  And we hear reports of a handful of other issues also being prepared to come to market.  Of course, this is still a trickle of issuance compared with where we were several years ago, so I think the market is still extremely impaired, but showing some signs of life. MR. KOHN. Are there signs that more are going to bring it to TALF? MR. SACK. I think TALF has been a very important factor in bringing this activity back and will continue to be for as long as its in place.  But, at the same time, I think there has been a surprise at how strong the demand has been for the issues.  So maybe thats the most encouraging signnot only did TALF get a deal done, but it brought some activity back to the market even independent of TALF.  We see that as a very positive sign. MR. NELSON. Id add just a few things. The two deals that were priced had been in the TALF pipeline, so they were thinking of making them TALF-eligible, and they decided, having observed the reaction to the first deal, it was possible to go ahead without that.  The other thing is 
 that half of the loans that were taken out for DDR have actually been repaid already, that is, half of the $72 million. Finally, yesterday was the December CMBS subscription, and there were no new-issue CMBS brought to that subscription. MR. SACK. Let me add a few more things.  We have begun to ask market participants about their expectations for the market, to try to assess how dependent it is on TALF.  Weve asked a very small set of market participants, so take all of these responses with a grain of salt.  The general view was that CMBS spreads would widen once the TALF expired, and, indeed, in secondary market trading we do see some difference between similar deals that are TALF-eligible and not TALF-eligible. So it does appear, based on that evidence, that the TALF is having an effect on keeping spreads narrower than otherwise. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Thank you. Brian, actually you began to answer my question on the primary dealers.  I realize, after listening to and seeing presentations like this, I didnt really know who the survey respondents were.  Is it really bank economists?  I thought this was more financial market participants.  I guess the question is:  If it is bank economists, is it really that different from, say, the Blue Chip or NABE or something like that? MR. SACK. Its very hard to gauge.  We know the survey is filled out by a lot of economists, but they sit on trading desks and talk to traders.  So its somewhat mixed, I would say, in terms of what you are actually getting. MR. EVANS. Do you have any idea if its consistent from time to time, or do they mix it up? MR. SACK. My impression is that its consistent.  At the New York Fed, we also interact with a separate group of advisers, who are from the buy side, and weve been 
   experimenting with running a similar survey out to that group where we clearly would be reaching investment managers.  As we move into 2010, we hope to bring that product on line as a MarketSOURCE piece for exactly this purpose, that is, to broaden our reach in these surveys.  I think the surveys are proving very valuable in being able to address key policy issues, so I think we want to maximize their effectiveness. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. As one of those people who used to receive those surveys, I know that they usually go to the economists who sit on the desk.  If theyre uncertain about how to answer the question, theyll talk to the traders.  So I think theres probably a little gap between the economists views and the traders views, but generally the traders are consulted. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, a couple of questions that are triggered by the slides, but you may want to wait until next month to answer them.  Looking at 
slide 23, if we wanted to shift this maturity schedule, could we trade within the portfolio to adjust the way that maturity schedule looks? MR. SACK. Yes, you certainly could. Even, say, within a certain asset class, like Treasuries, you have options such as those that came up earlier, like redeeming longer-term 
securities and reinvesting shorter-term ones, or even reinvesting longer-term ones into shorter-term securities.  There are some limits on doing that at auction, but you could always do that in the secondary market as well.  The same is true for MBS.  Theres nothing in theory that prevents us from selling MBS and purchasing Treasuries or trying to reallocate across asset classes. I think there would be obvious challenges to doing any of that in terms of 
  communicating to the markets what youre doing, and wed have to be very careful in that communication, but it could be done. Ill also say that theres a lot of concern in the markets about sales of MBS.  Weve bought a lot, and weve been the dominant player in the market.  The market is concerned about adjusting to our not being there as a steady purchaser, and I think the idea of our being there as a net seller of MBS is a concern to some.  So while all of these strategies are possible, I think wed have to be very careful about what we were trying to achieve and make sure the market understood it. MR. LOCKHART. A second question, if I may. According to slide 30, if I understand it correctly, a great majority of respondents believe that we would start tightening the fed funds rate target while we have relatively high levels of excess reserves.  How are they thinking and how are you thinking about how the fed funds rate market works in the condition of high reserves? MR. SACK. Again, we didnt get into that level of detail.  I think the presumption would be that they understand that interest on excess reserves is a tool that can raise all short-term interest rates even with a large amount of reserves in the system.  In this response, theyre implicitly saying that that mechanism will work, or at least that policymakers think it will work with a relatively high degree of reserves, or at least that policymakers will begin to tighten and see if it works. MR. LOCKHART. So if we raise the interest rate on excess reserves, the fed funds rate will follow to an extent. MR. SACK. Right. I think thats the general perception, although as I noted in the text, theres a lot of uncertainty. If you look at panel 27, we know that with all of these excess 
reserves, the funds rate has been soft to the IOER rate.  I think a real key policy question is:  Is that spread steady?  If that spread is steady10 to 15 basis pointsthen it seems that policymakers have very effective control of short-term interest rates even with the amount of reserves indicated in the lower right panel.  Theres just no way to measure empirically whether that spread will be steady because weve only had this period of high reserves when weve been pinned up against the zero bound. So that is, I think, a key policy question. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just a quick question on slide No. 29.  What do you guess that slide would have looked like before we began testing reverse repos as an exit strategy? MR. SACK. I think your question raises a general issue about the fact that were doing a survey with the firms we have been interacting with the most in terms of setting up the reverse repo program. There was some concern on our end about whether that was biasing the results in this direction.  So, I think that argues for the wider survey. Having said all of that, when we speak to market participants outside of the primary dealers, theres just an incredible amount of focus on reverse repos, and I am not sure why that is, relative to term deposits.  So I think, broadly speaking, market participants really do expect reverse repurchase agreements to be a key part of the policy tools.  Of course, in this response 
both reverse repos and term deposits are being used very actively.  Reverse repos are a little bit higher, but theyre both very active draining tools.  It may be that asking the dealers puts a little 
bit more focus on reverse repos, but Im not sure.  I wouldnt want to say that this probably does not represent the broader review. I think that, if we could make an effort to find that out through a broader set of participants, then I wouldnt be surprised if it comes out similarly. 
 MR. FISHER. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, just a follow-up on that last point.  I think the dealers are focusing on reverse repos because thats what they hear us talk about most of the time.  We havent talked as much publicly about the term deposits or asset sales.  So I think we sort of get back from them what we say at times, and we have to be a little bit careful interpreting that, just as an observation. On redemptions and so forth, I tend to think we are going to have to shrink our balance sheet, and I think your memo very effectively focuses our thinking about the optimal size of our 
balance sheet and how we want to think about that.  We have walked up to this question over and over again over the last year and a half and really havent come to grips with what the answer is, but this sort of raises that question foursquare, and I think its important that we think about that.  I think the direction going forward is that the balance sheet is going to get smaller rather than larger, so Im in favor of letting them all run off.  In terms of Treasuries, I do think at some point, as the Chairmans comment suggested, if we get back to a SOMA portfolio that looks more like it used to look, were going to have to start substituting short-term for long-term.  I dont know that we need to do that initially, but certainly that would be a possibility. Back to the sequencingagain, I think these things interact with one another.  We have two other things affecting the overall balance sheet.  One is the runoff in the liquidity programs.  Another issue, which we havent returned to, is the SFP.  Whats going to happen to it? Is it going to come back?  How is that going to effect our balance sheet? And how would that 
interact with all of this?  So I think theres a whole complex set of interactions that we need to be thinking about. Thats why I commented earlier about the need to discuss our views on how we 
implement policy going forward, sort of a new steady state.  How we get to that steady state is combination of these things.  I dont think we can think about them in isolation. So, if you have got some observations about the SFP, Id love to hear them, too. MR. SACK. First, let me respond to your point on communications about reverse repos versus other tools, such as asset sales or the term deposit facility.  I think in part that has been a result of the timing.  The reverse repo tool for the Treasury and agency collateral, at least, has progressed more quickly, and we wanted to go ahead and test it. So you do have a situation where weve had more communications about that.  I think well seeand Jim Clouse will talk about thismore communication on the term deposit facility going forward, and so someup in that regard. On the SFP, I thought the survey results were interesting.  Roughly speaking, half of the respondents thought it would just stay at $15 billion, and the other half thought it would be ramped back up to $200 billion.  Our thinking was that, with an adequate increase in the debt limit, which as of yesterday we thought we were probably going to get, SFP would run back up to $200 billion over a relatively quick time framefour to six weeksand to a point where we had a nice, evenly spaced maturity distribution that would then just roll over and keep that size.  More recently, it looks like the debt limit may be raised by a much more limited amount, only enough to provide room for several months, in which case it would be very hard to run up the SFP because it would immediately have to be run back down.  But I think that, absent that constraint, our inclination is to have Treasury run the SFP back up, and that obviously would keep it as a policy tool that could be used if needed at some point in the future.  Theres no reason $200 billion is the right number, but I think that decision would have to be made in 
   conjunction with our assessment of the effectiveness of the other tools in terms of getting reserves out. MR. PLOSSER. But I think thats why this is important.  The SFP got run down on us, which was implicitly an increase in our balance sheet, and in excess reserves that we did not necessarily elect to have happen. The discussion earlier on this was that it was going to come back up again. What I hear is that it may not go back up, which, in my view, would strengthen the case for letting some of these other things mature and run off, as opposed to reinvesting them, because excess reserves are already higher than we thought they would be in the initial go-around of asset purchases. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A lot depends on where you think our policy is working.  If its working on the asset side and the amount of MBS we buy is what really matters, then the amount of excess reserves is just kind of a residual, and its not doing much independently. MR. PLOSSER. Fair enough. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But there are a number of different ways to think about it. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, this question is more for you.  Your comment at the outset and then President Plossers reaction to it was describing a discussion that would take place in January.  Im not clear on how you are outlining the policy discussion that might take place in January versus perhaps now, and if you could clarify that for me, that would 
be helpful. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Sure. I was just responding to the comment myself, but there are two separate questions.  One question is how accommodative policy should be, and that 
has to do with the outlook for the economy and inflation and so on.  But there are also what you 
  might call the technical questions, and, in particular, given that we want to unwind accommodation, what would be the appropriate sequencing in terms of the tools that we use.  Should we, for example, drain reserves first and then raise the interest rate on reserves? If we drain reserves first, which particular tools should we use and in what combination?  President Plosser pointed out that thats also linked to the question of what our official target is.  We may simply want to announce that we are raising the interest rate on excess reserves and make no comment whatsoever about the federal funds rate, because the control of the federal funds rate may be loose and may not be that meaningful an interest rate, given the nature of that market now. So again, I want to separate the question of when and how quickly we should be removing accommodation from a more technical set of questions about whether there is a preferred sequencing or combination that is in some sense independent of the policy decision itself. There may not be.  It could be that those two things are so intertwined that we just have to decide on them jointly, but it is certainly worth the discussion. MR. HOENIG. I agree. I would assume that we could at this meeting hint about our preferences as we look forward to January, because of the very developments that are taking place now in the economy, and not just wait until January for their discussion. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No. Im sorry. I didnt mean to prohibit discussion, but what I was saying is that, to the extent that there is a technical question, it would be useful to have some staff input and a chance to think about it in advance. MR. HOENIG. Absolutely. I agree with that. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Ill pass. Honest. [Laughter] 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you. I think this follows up on the point about the meeting that well have in January to discuss tools and sequencing.  Brian, on your chart 27, my staff had conducted a similar analysis.  They used the dates from December 2008 through current period and found that there is a closer correlation between the effective fed funds rate and interest on reserves when excess reserves are under $800 billion.  It is not as clear on your chart as it was on the chart that my staff prepared.  Is this a useful analysis as we start to think about the tools and sequencing?  When excess reserves are closer to $800 billion, will the interest on reserves then be a more effective tool? MR. SACK. That sounds right.  I actually took this chart from some work being done by Jamie McAndrews and other staff at the New York Fed.  And I know there is similar work going 
on at the Board and probably a number of other places.  That work tried to fit a demand schedule through here, and its a nonlinear demand schedule.  As you suggest, it has more elasticity at lower levels of reserves and then flattens out. That work has a lot of other interesting results, including looking at whether GSE balances have a special effect relative to the overall level of reserves.  So I would expect, hopefully, that some of that work will be presented in whatever 
material is prepared for the next meeting. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, what is the Desks position, if any, on the effect of the term deposit facility and reverse repos on short-term interest rates? Suppose we start running a term deposit facility.  What kind of effect do you foresee that having on the level of short-term interest rates?  Or is it just going to be totally disconnected, or do you think there is going to be some pass-through or what? 
    MR. SACK. I think one thing it clearly does is pull reserves out of the marketless reserves available for overnight lending means youll bring short-term interest rates up.  Thats exactly whats shown in exhibit 27, that is, the idea that those tools could be used to get to a lower level of reserve balances and bring these other short-term interest rates up closer to and maybe more connected to the IOER rate.  I think thats the main effect. One question we wrestled with, especially with reverses, is whether theres an independent effect, a direct effect, on RP rates.  If we drain $300 billion of reserves by dumping a bunch of collateral into the RP market, do we not only get the effect in exhibit 27, but do we also get further upward pressure on the RP rate from that collateral?  I think we see that as a possibilitythat is, you could actually get some further upward pressure on RP rates relative to overnight rates. I think that would tend to be transitory, but certainly if that collateral were dumped quickly that could happen.  But generally speaking, and over longer periods of time, we think the main effect comes via affecting the amount of liquidity available in the overnight lending market, in which case draining enough liquidity tends to pull rates up towards the IOER rate. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. So youre not worried about these programs basically being an influence on short-term interest rates beyond the IOER rate.  Thats what I would be 
concerned about. Youre just saying we are moving the fed funds rate closer to the IOER rate.  
Thats fine with me.  Im more worried that theyre going to be a separate influence on short-term interest rates beyond the IOER rate. MR. SACK. Well, I think at some point, if the size is large enough, then, yes, you could pull short-term interest rates above the IOER rate.  Im making an assumption that the size of these programs will be calibrated to some objective, whether that objective is getting the other 
   rates around the IOER rate or not.  So the size will be endogenous to the framework that the FOMC lays out. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Well, the description of the TDF involved an auction, so sometimes it can be hard to know exactly what price youll get out of that, I would guess. MR. SACK. Thats right. Theres going to be analysis and judgment, but, of course, in the old days when we did temporary operations every day, there was always assessment and judgment about how much operations were needed. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will be hearing about the TDF in just a moment.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I just wanted to make sure I understand exhibits 19 and 20 and the effects of tapering.  Were tapering now, and weve gotten some distance along that path. I guess these charts right below are meant to say that the effects have been minor, or there havent been any effects, even though people in the market said, Oh, youre going to back up these rates.  Is that a fair assessment? MR. SACK. Yes, exactly. 
MR. BULLARD. Okay. But, nevertheless, they think if we keep going, then youre going to get a big effect at some point in the future? MR. SACK. Thats right. 
MR. BULLARD. Okay. So theyre sticking to their story.  [Laughter] MR. SACK. Theyre sticking to their story. MR. BULLARD. And were going to watch it, because were going to be tapering for another 90 days or so. 
     MR. SACK. Thats right. Our purchases have declined, but conditions in the market have been very tight. Its not just that the assets didnt cheapen, but they have actually richened in terms of the spread narrowing further.  So we havent seen any signs of what we and the markets worried about as we backed away from this. Now, there are a lot of things going on in markets.  Theres not a lot of supply coming into the market.  We are approaching year-end, and so on.  So well wait and see. But so far, there are no signs that there is any increase in rates from our pulling back. MR. BULLARD. Okay. So I have just one question on the survey.  You say, selling assets. Well, what do you mean selling assets?  If you say youre going to dump $1 trillion worth of MBS onto the market, yes, thats going to have a big effect.  But if you sell it in some measured way that makes sense, then it seems like these are the right pictures to be thinking abouta first pass at how that would happen. MR. SACK. Yes. In my view, a big chunk of the question about asset sales is:  Can we do them in a way that doesnt cause a sharp backup in rates, whether thats a pre-commitment to a gradual sales pace, or whether its building in some kind of state responsiveness to interest rates, or whether its other approaches?  The staff is trying to think about these issuesthat is, what mechanisms could we use to sell assets safely?  It may be that there is no way to do it convincingly, and the only way to shed assets is to do it through redemptions, and that would be fine. But I think we at least want to think through all of the options and assess whether there is some approach where we could basically get the effectsthe same kind of gradual winding down in the portfolio you would get under redemptionsbut that would give us more flexibility along the way. MR. BULLARD. Thank you. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. I changed my mind.  [Laughter]  The day we announce that were going to sell assets, theres no doubt that prices are going to change.  So I dont think no price change should be the standard of safety, right?  We want to minimize the volatility of the path that prices take to where theyre going after the shift of our policy, represented by the announcement of a path of asset sales.  Is that right?  I mean, youre using the word safely.  Im sort of inquiring about your meaning of the word safely here. MR. SACK. Okay. What I meant, but you can correct me, was not producing a large backup in rates. I guess I was working under the assumption that an abrupt and sizable increase in long-term interest rates would be viewed as counterproductive at this point. MR. LACKER. But is it obvious that any backup in rates on MBS would be counterproductive? Theres some threshold we might want to achieveright?because the data all suggest that were pushing them artificially low. MR. SACK. The data suggest weve pushed them low.  We do think the LSAPs have worked, and it is just an optimal policy decision about how quickly you want to unwind any of those effects. We can put this differently:  A challenge with asset sales perhaps is that there will be a tendency for the markets to front-load all of the effects.  When we did LSAPs, you saw an immediate and sizable market reaction; then a lot of the program was carrying through the commitment to justify that reaction.  I think policymakers need to be concerned about those same patterns taking place in reverse. So thats the issue:  Is there a way to unwind the portfolio slowly to limit that immediate reaction? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One would think that clarity about what youre going to dospeed or price or whateverwould help. 
 MR. LACKER. Yes. Absolutely. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN. Just to follow up on that point, it seems like you have a huge inventory, and the market doesnt know how you are going to dispose of it.  Asking the street about what the interest rate reaction would beif at every meeting we might potentially dump a whole lot of it, I would want a huge risk premium before I bought that asset.  So, as we think about asset sales, and different rules for handling them, it seems that if theres a clear rule, it may have a different effect on the risk premium than the possibility that every six weeks you may or may not have a huge inventory dumped onto the market.  We havent had an experience like this, so I dont know how you can measure it empirically. But to the extent that the dealer community has any feel for this, it may be worth getting some sense about interest rates as well as quantities when you do your survey. MR. SACK. Okay. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. One quick question, Mr. Chairman.  You may have alluded to this, but are we going to take an action on whether or not we want to do the redemptions? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My understanding was that tentatively, for the moment, we were just going to let things run off. But we were just introducing this as an issue we need to be aware of. MR. SACK. Correct. I think that strategy is consistent with the current directive, so I dont believe any action is necessary. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Vice Chairman. 
     VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just want to add that the issue on redemptions, though, is also colored by what you want the portfolio to look like in the longer run.  Lets say we start with a portfolio that was bills, notes, and bonds, and was roughly in proportion to the market; but its not clear that thats necessarily the portfolio that we want in the new world as we transition to a new monetary policy setting.  That decision on redemptions is partly about balance sheet size, and its also partly about where we want to take the portfolio over the medium to longer run. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Great. Okay?  If there are no other questions, let me turn to Jim Clouse and Bill Nelson for a brief report on some facilities.  Jim.  MR. CLOUSE. Following up on the plans discussed at the last meeting, the Desk carried out a series of small-scale, real-value reverse RP operations over the intermeeting period to identify any operational difficulties in moving cash and collateral between the Federal Reserve, the clearing banks, and the primary dealers.  Before conducting the operations, the New York Fed released a statement announcing that a series of such operations would be conducted and emphasizing that they had no implications for the stance of monetary policy.  Five such operations have been conducted with both Treasury and agency debt securities serving as collateral.  The maturities for these operations ranged from overnight to eight days, including some with overlapping terms.  The operations were quite smallthe maximum outstanding over the last two weeks was only about $400 millionand, as anticipated, had little or no market impact.  All of the operations were conducted, settled, and matured successfully.  A few minor technical issues surfaced and are being addressed.  In 
short, the tests confirmed that the System now has the capacity to conduct triparty reverse RP operations effectively with primary dealers using Treasury and agency debt as collateral. The staff continues to work on extending the reverse RP program to include agency MBS as collateral and to include a broader set of counterparties. Regarding the extension of collateral to include agency MBS, the staff has been working with the two triparty clearing banks and the agency MBS custodian to determine the most efficient, cost-effective means of reversing out agency MBS collateral.  Significant complications must be addressed in this effort, but the team expects to reach 
agreement on an overall approach in the near future and to give the clearing banks the go-ahead to make the necessary system changes within the next month.  We expect that those changes will be implemented by the end of the first quarter of next year and that small-scale, real-value test reverse RP operations with agency MBS can begin shortly thereafter. 
      In terms of expanding the range of counterparties for reverse RP operations beyond the primary dealers, the Desk has identified a set of large cash providers and has begun discussions with some of these firms on a number of operational issues.  In addition, the staff is working to develop a set of public criteria that will allow a small number of large firms, perhaps two dozen, to present themselves as potential counterparties. Both of these efforts are proving quite challenging given the wide range of institutions involved. The staff is pursuing this agenda aggressively, but our best guess at this point is that the expansion of the range of counterparties will require several months for completion. Turning to other work on reserve management tools, the staff has developed a proposal for a term deposit facility, the basic elements of which were summarized in a memo distributed last week.  As envisioned in the proposal, term deposits would be a new type of account offered by the Federal Reserve to any institution that is eligible to earn interest on balances at a Reserve Bank.  Balances placed in term deposits would not be eligible to satisfy reserve or clearing balance requirements or to cover daylight or overnight overdrafts. As a result, balances placed in term deposits would drain reserves. The proposal suggests that term deposits would be fixed-rate obligations and could have maturities ranging between one and six months with no 
early withdrawal option. As required by statute, the rate paid on term deposits could not exceed the general level of short-term interest rates.  Consistent with the Federal Reserves general policy of accepting as collateral any sound asset that a bank may hold, the proposal suggests that term deposits could be pledged as collateral to secure borrowing at the discount window or daylight credit. The staff proposal notes that term deposits could be offered to the public in several ways but focuses largely on the possibility of auctioning term deposits.  Auctions of term deposits would employ a single-price format so that all winning bidders receive the highest rate among all winning bids at the auction.  Auctions would be conducted at regular intervals, perhaps every two weeks, and the settlement dates and maturities of the deposits could be aligned with the beginning of reserve 
maintenance periods.  The proposal suggests that the Board would select one Reserve Bank to act as the term deposit offering administrator for the System.  The offering administrator would be responsible for tasks such as announcing term deposit auctions and posting auction results to a public website. The staff proposal would seek public comment on three basic questions:  the need for limitations on the amount of term deposits that any individual institution may hold or win at auction; the appropriate range of maturities for term deposits; and whether there are any alternative structures for term deposits that should be considered.  After review by the Board, the staff proposal would be published in the Federal Register with a 30-day public comment period. Based on the comments received, a final 
proposal would be published early next year.  As noted previously, the automated systems necessary to implement a term deposit program have been developed and 
tested, but a number of operational steps must be completed before the program can 
    
    be implemented.  The staff will be working aggressively to complete these steps over the next few months.  Bill will now continue the staff presentation. MR. NELSON. Thank you, Jim.  I will briefly update the Committee on the modifications to the terms on the Term Auction Facility and primary credit programs that the staff anticipates it will propose over the next several months. The TAF auction that was conducted yesterday was again substantially undersubscribed. When it settles on Thursday, TAF credit will equal $76 billion, 45 percent lower than at the time of the November FOMC meeting.  All currently outstanding TAF loans will come due coincident with the January TAF auction.  At that point, only 28-day TAF credit will be provided.  Although only $75 billion will 
be auctioned in January, it seems likely that it will again be undersubscribed because of the steep downward trend in TAF credit and because the year-end will have 
passed. In light of the continued improvement in interbank funding markets, as discussed at the November FOMC meeting, the staff expects that it will soon recommend the Board announce a schedule of TAF auction amounts that decline to zero.  The staff will propose a specific schedule after observing the results of the January 11 auction.  If the auction is again substantially undersubscribed, the staff could propose amounts that decline to zero in just a few months, but evidence of stronger demand could lead us to recommend an auction schedule that declines a bit more slowly, say, to zero by midyear. Turning to primary credit, primary credit declined 14 percent over the intermeeting period to $19 billion.  Of that amount, $14 billion is outstanding to Depfa, and $4 billion to Dexia, which are both branches of European banks. On November 17, the Board announced that the maximum maturity on primary credit loans would be reduced to 28 days on January 14, a first step in normalizing the terms on primary credit.  That change will align the maximum term on primary credit loans with the terms of TAF loans.  A next step in normalization could be a 25 basis point increase in the primary credit rate.  The discount rate adjustment could be 
discussed by Board members and Reserve Bank Presidents at the January FOMC 
meeting, with any increase announced a few days later, presumably accompanied by 
language that made it clear that the move was not a signal about the outlook for the 
stance of monetary policy.  The staff envisions that Presidents might initiate discussions with their boards of directors about a potential increase a week or so before the January FOMC meeting. A further step in normalization of primary credit terms could be a reduction in the maximum maturity to overnight, except for the smallest institutions.  The Board and Reserve Banks could evaluate early next year the advisability and potential timing of such a move. 
  Consideration about further increases in the primary creditfederal funds rate spread could be deferred until perhaps midyear to evaluate such further adjustments in light of accumulated experience with a 50 basis point spread and shorter terms.  
That concludes our prepared remarks.  We would be happy to answer your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there questions for Jim or Bill?  President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Yes. Could you elaborate on what discussions with our directors you envision in January? MR. NELSON. Discussions about the increase in the discount rate.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well need a recommendation. MR. LACKER. I see. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Its been a while. 
MR. MADIGAN. But our view is that this is obviously a sensitive topic, so it might be better to hold off on that for several weeks. MR. HOENIG. Rather than in this meeting? 
MR. MADIGAN. Right. No, Im sorry, Im talking about discussions with the boards of directors. MR. HOENIG. With the boards of directorsI understand. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question on the term deposit facility. One of the provisions is no early withdrawal, but another provision is you can be pledged as collateral at the window. Those seem to be in conflict. MR. CLOUSE. Both of them would give some potential for accessing liquidity.  I personally wouldnt characterize it as being in conflict.  It was a fine judgment on whether we should allow these to be pledged as collateral at the discount window, but the Federal Reserve has a long-standing policy of taking basically any asset that a bank can hold as collateral.  As 
  long as the pricing for the primary credit program is correct, as was pointed out at the last meeting, actually, there wouldnt be strong incentives for an institution to pledge collateral at the primary credit facility in order to invest it in a term deposit.  We would ensure that that sort of arbitrage was ruled out. And, of course, theres lots of stigma around borrowing at the discount window, too, so the option value of that is probably not that high. I view it, anyway, as sort of a technical thing.  Banks already have over $1 trillion worth of collateral pledged at the discount window.  They could do anything they need to at the primary credit window with any other form of collateral.  So theres nothing really special about the term deposit facility allowing them to pledge those particular deposits as collateral.  Its just to be consistent with our existing policy. MR. BULLARD. Well, you might turn that around and say, Then, why have a no early withdrawal provision? MR. CLOUSE. Well, an early withdrawal option is, first of all, tremendously complicated to develop in the automated system.  The automated system has been developed, and, to put in that feature, would really greatly complicate things.  In addition, you have to worry a lot about where you set the penalty to guard against very frequent usage of that option.  So if you wanted to provide some capability for these institutions to access liquidity, it just seemed a lot more natural to keep access to liquidity in a facility where we understand exactly how things work. And, as you know, we dont anticipate, especially as we move to normalize the program, that institutions will be regularly using the primary credit facility.  But I would say, too, that it will be interesting to review comments on this from the public  MR. BULLARD. Is this the comment period for the Committee? 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Go ahead.  We dont have this unstructured period, so consider this to be your time to comment.  MR. BULLARD. Okay. One of the aspects of the TDF is, well, now were going to drain reserves. How meaningful is it to say that Ive got an overnight deposit at the central bank versus Ive got a 30-day deposit at the central bank, one of which Im going to count as reserves and in the monetary base, and the other of which Im not going to count in that? It seems to me the macroeconomic difference is very slight. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, you cant lend the 30-day money in the overnight federal funds market. MR. BULLARD. Theres a question about how liquid it really is, but it seems that its very substitutable. I can wait 30 days and take it out. MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. Is it useful to consider alongside that question, President Bullard, the question of how a term deposit compares in liquidity with an equal term Treasury holding, which is equally collateralizable, and, thus, equally liquid, but we consider a nonmonetary asset? MR. MADIGAN. Indeed, the TDFs would be less liquid, because they cant be sold. MR. LACKER. Right. Theyre nontransferable.  There you go. Its even less liquid than T-bills. MR. BULLARD. Theres variable liquidity among various assets, and you should have metrics about the degree of liquidity, and then get your measure of how much liquidity is out there, instead of arbitrarily saying certain assets are liquid and others are not. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. For the reasons that you just described, I think it will be helpful in managing overnight interest rates.  Of course, theres always the question about the linkages between that and broad financial conditions, but our typical target is the overnight rate. MR. BULLARD. Do we expect the interest rates in this facility to be anything other than the expected interest rate on reserves over the six months?  Plus a term premium. MR. CLOUSE. The staff proposal envisions largely an auction facility to offer these deposits, and you might expect, then, that the auction rate would stop out somewhat below a comparable term money market instrument, for example, maybe a little bit below LIBOR, reflecting the fact that were a risk-free counterparty rather than a risky counterparty. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Just a question on the primary credit rate.  We all have directors meetings at different times.  So if its purely a technical adjustment, it might be better to have a day that we all called our boards of directors at the same time.  Im just a little worried that somebody might have a directors meeting in the first week of January, and though I know this is supposed to stay confidential, it might start leaking out.  So it just strikes me that it would be better if we could just say on a certain day you will call your board and everybody talks about it as being a technical adjustment, if thats truly what we think it is. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Yes, I was just going to suggest that.  I think the record is that rate change requests from Reserve Banks have not leakedI dont know of any example of rate requests that have leaked. I do think a little more formal coordination might be useful, in that, going into our January meetings, wed know that were getting the wink that the Board is likely to approve this technical adjustment. 
       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well coordinate.  And we dont need recommendations from all the Banks, of course, but just one.  We understand the need to coordinate this in a way that is not going to create problems.  Thank you. President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. It might also be a good time to remind directors.  There was one occasion when it was leaked, and it was a federal crime.  So it might be an appropriate time to remind directors, as we do all the time, that any discussion of the discount rate is confidential, and if there is a leak, its a federal offense. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well put.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Id like to follow up a little bit on the TDF, because Im still uncomfortable with the potential for arbitrage between it and primary credit.  Jim, do you envision that the TAF will shut down before TDF becomes active? MR. CLOUSE. That seems likely, given the markets expectations. MR. PLOSSER. Otherwise, I can imagine a bank lending to us at one rate and getting the TAF credit at 25 basis points, which is borrowing backed by posting TDF collateral.  It looks as if youre going to cap the auction rate at the primary credit rate. MR. CLOUSE. Well, wed want to be sure that it couldnt go higher than the primary credit rate, for sure. MR. PLOSSER. Because otherwise you are inviting them to game the system.  But if the term premium is not high enough, then that sort of enters into what maturities youre going to offer, whether the term premium for six months or a year would be so large that you couldnt cap the TDF rate at the primary credit ratethat is, the spread wasnt big enough.  So Im just really puzzled about how all of this is going to sort itself out, and whether or not this is really going to be effective at draining any reserves at all. 
      CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Theres always some primary credit rate spread thats big enough that you can slip anything you want to underneath it. MR. PLOSSER. Right. But that spread will partly depend on what the range of maturities are that we offer at the TDF.  The longer the maturity, presumably the higher the premium, and whether weve got the spread high enough to cover that would be something that we would have to sort of work on, I would think, in order to make it work. Will that end up raising interest rates?  President Kocherlakota was talking about this. Do these tools affect interest rates in some sense? Is this just a backhanded way of raising rates, which we might as well raise anyway?  Im still a little uncomfortable with how this is actually going to work and whether its going to do what we think its going to do. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. This is great monetary economics.  [Laughter] You can have such a great graduate class. MR. PLOSSER. Yes, right. If I live that long.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Yes. Im going to follow up on some of the things President Plosser was saying. What we could do is raise the interest rate on excess reserves; we could offer this term deposit, which strikes me as like offering a certificate of deposit, a CD, to a bank, and they can lock in their fundsthats offering a high interest rate on a particular kind of illiquid asset; or we could sell off MBS, but were worried about raising the rates there.  So I guess were going to defer all of this until January, and well sort it all out at that point.  But there is this question about which interest rate were going to be manipulating at a given point in time.  Im not seeing clearly why this is the right interest rate to manipulate as opposed to the 
  IOER rate or just selling agency MBS.  Thats the part Im not following.  But, again, maybe this will be cleared up in January. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont want to interject, but I think there are two ways to look at it. One is just to say the IOER rate, which is an overnight rate, is the basic tool, and we just have all of these fine-tuning instruments to make sure we dont have too much slippage between the market ratethe federal funds rateand the IOER rate.  Thats one approach, and I think thats the simplest approach.  The other way, though, is to say, well, we really have tools that can affect things at different parts of the term structure or different types of instruments, and we can play with that if we want. That gets more complicated and it makes policymaking more complicated.  So I dont know how far we want to go in that direction, but I think there are at least two ways to look at that. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Just to follow upif Im a bank, why would I put my reserves into this account unless it paid a higher interest rate than the IOER rate?  Because its less liquid. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It will. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Okay. So, at least as far as I can see, its not just fine-tuning that gap between the fed funds rate and the IOER rate.  Its actually playing with the various aspects of the term structure in some fashion.  And maybe thats the right way for us to proceed. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Market operations are swaps of assets for assets.  Were swapping reserves for deposits. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Something about President Plossers question made me think about stigma.  Jim, you mentioned this, too.  If you were a bank, and you had these term deposits, and then something happened and you went to the windowwhich is just a normal type of thing 
       would you be worried? In the old days, if we were worried about arbitrage, then the supervisor would make a phone call.  It seems that we would have to be very clear in mentioning that it would still be okay to access the window under the right conditions, and that you wouldnt get a call from the supervisor.  Or, if theyre worried about that, then they might just not bid on the term deposits, and it doesnt amount to anything.  It might be a little tricky. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. We left that old regime, of course, when we moved the discount rate above the funds rate. MR. EVANS. Right. Thats why its okay. Of course, they still dont borrow.  At some point, Jim mentioned that stigma is our friendI wrote that downor at least that it could help us with something. But we think that stigma will make this arbitrage go away.  Its just something to think about. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions? [No response.]  I could press on just a bit more.  Our friend Dave Stockton is a victim of H1N1 flu virus.  David Wilcox has stepped into the breach, so let me turn it over to David. MR. WILCOX.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be delivering remarks this morning that were, for the most part, prepared by Dave Stockton, who cant be with us today, as the Chairman mentioned, because of illness.  I should note that such circumstances may have little historical precedent.  My colleagues and I have now completed an exhaustive search of the National Archives, checking all the criticaloriginal source material, and found no instance in which Robin had to clean up Gotham City on his own because Batman was indisposed; and no mention of Tonto ever having to face mortal peril by himself because the Lone Ranger was back at the ranch recuperating from the latest flu pandemic.  My colleagues in Public Affairs often emphasize the importance of expectations management, so in that spirit, I have set myself the bar of hoping that todays proceedings go better than when Captain Edward Smith asked First Officer Murdoch to take a turn at the helm of the Titanic [Laughter.] Now turning to Daves remarksI am speaking in Daves voice: Id like to do three things this afternoon. First, we have received an unusually large slug of data since the close of the Greenbook, so I will provide a brief update on 
the near-term forecast. Second, Id like to summarize our take on where we are in the 
    recovery process at present. And finally, I will point out what we see as the major sources of uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. Since we published the forecast last Wednesday, we have received readings on retail sales, merchandise trade, inventories, consumer sentiment, industrial production, and producer prices. The retail sales data for November were right in line with our projection. As you know, we had been rather skeptical earlier in the fall when the consumer spending data began to show improvement.  We thought declining employment, weak incomes, sour sentiment, and still tight financial 
conditions should be exerting greater restraint on spending than implied by the incoming data.  However, some of that tension was reduced by the sizable upward 
revisions that the BEA made to its estimates of labor income in the second and third quarters. Those revisions suggest that the recovery in consumer spending is on a firmer footing.  Last Fridays reading on consumer sentiment from the Reuters/Michigan survey showed a further modest improvement that also is consistent with the pickup in spending that we have witnessed of late.  All told, we 
now estimate that real PCE increased at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the second half, no different from our forecast of last Wednesday, but about  percentage point faster than our October forecast. We also received data on retail inventories late last week.  Retail inventories outside the motor vehicle sector ran off at a slower pace in October than we had expected, adding a couple of tenths to our forecast of growth in real GDP in the current quarter. And the somewhat stronger-than-expected figures for exports in October reported in last weeks release on merchandise trade also added a couple of tenths to current quarter growth.  Nathan will have a bit more to say about that in a few moments.  Taken together, the inventory and trade data would lead us to revise up estimated growth in real GDP in the current quarter to an annual rate of about 4 percent. Earlier today, we published our first estimate of industrial production in November.  Total IP increased an estimated 0.8 percent last month, while manufacturing output rose 1.1 percent.  We pride ourselves on cultivating a high degree of collegiality in the Division of Research and Statistics, so it comes as no surprise to find out that we had built a pretty good forecast of these results into last weeks Greenbook [laughter]. All told, and notwithstanding the downbeat tone to the December Empire State Manufacturing Survey that was released this morning, the industrial sector remains on track for a second consecutive quarter of 6+ percent rate of growth, thus beginning the process of digging out from some very steep earlier declines. This brings me to the second issue that I wanted to touch on this afternoon, which is, given all that we have seen in the past six weeks, where do we think we are in the cyclical process?  These could well prove to be famous last words, but I believe that the accumulating evidence supports the view that a moderate recovery is under way 
and, indeed, that the recovery is gaining greater traction.  Not only have we seen an 
    acceleration in aggregate output, but the composition of that acceleration seems favorable for activity going forward. Importantly, domestic final sales are firming.  The key elements of that firming include a recovery in housing, the aforementioned turnaround in consumer spending, and a stabilization in spending on capital goods.  Moreover, exports are getting a boost from the improvement in global activity.  And with the overall prospects for sales looking brighter, businesses appear to be lifting production further in order to slow the runoff of inventories. Finally, we are now seeing more encouragingalbeit still tentativesigns that the deterioration in the labor market is abating.  Declines in private payrolls averaged 90,000 per month over the past three months.  That compares with job losses that were averaging about 700,000 per month earlier this year and were still running at about 425,000 per month at midyear.  Other indicators that labor market conditions are beginning to turn include an upswing in temporary help employment in recent months and a jump in the workweek in November.  And since the November survey 
week, initial claims for unemployment insurance have continued to drift down. While the probability that we have entered a self-sustaining recovery appears to have increased appreciably, considerable risks continue to attend our forecast.  One risk that has been highlighted by the recent data is that of a sharper acceleration of activity, driven in part by a more rapid attempt by businesses to halt a further runoff 
of inventories and perhaps even add to stocks.  The book value inventory data that we have for October show a small accumulation of stocks in the manufacturing and trade sectors after a long period of huge liquidations, and a sharp rebound in activity caused by a swing in the inventory cycle has been a feature of some previous, more V-shaped recoveries. In our forecast, we have assumed that the positive figure for October overstates the underlying upswing, and we have penciled in further moderate declines in inventories for the remainder of the quarter.  We have done so because we just havent seen or heard much that would indicate that a substantially greater snapback in inventory investment is providing a major lift to production.  The national and regional purchasing managers reports point to ongoing increases in factory output, but moderate onesnot a sudden or sharp pop in activity.  And my reading is that the reports given in the Beige Book do not seem consistent with an inventory-led surge of major proportions in production. But if we are misreading the situation and the liquidation of inventories is coming to an end more abruptly than we are projecting, then the growth of real GDP could easily outstrip our 4 percent estimate in the current quarter, and if past patterns were to prevail, we could see several quarters of outsized increases in real GDP.  In the first instance, a faster turnaround in inventory investment would pull forward some of the growth that we have projected to be stretched out over the next couple of years.  But greater near-term strength could beget stronger household and business confidence and spending, as well as a faster relaxation of the terms on which credit is being offered to households and nonfinancial businesses, all of which could amplify the effects on the growth of real GDP, the path of resource utilization, and price 
        inflation. We will be monitoring these cyclical forces carefully in the period immediately ahead. Despite the generally more favorable tenor of the incoming data of late, there remain considerable downside risks to the Greenbook projection as well.  One prominent risk is that final sales peter out next year rather than accelerating further as we are forecasting. After declining at an annual rate of about 2 percent in the first half, final sales appear to be increasing at about a 2 percent pace in the second half, and we are projecting a 3 percent advance in 2010.  Much of next years acceleration occurs in spending for durable goods, especially business investment.  In our view, improving cash flows, an ample stock of liquid assets, increasing confidence in the durability of the recovery, the release of some pent-up demand, and a further easing of financial strains should provide noticeable impetus to investment spending.  But it is possible that we are too optimistic in our expectation of further easing of financial conditions, including the terms of lending from the banking sector, or we could be attributing too much staying power to the stimulus being provided by fiscal policy. A second risk relates to the labor market.  As I noted earlier, we have been encouraged by the recent data.  But it is important to note that, to date, the smaller employment declines have principally been driven by a reduction in layoffs.  As yet, we have seen few signs of a widespread pickup in hiring in readings from the JOLTS data, the NFIB survey of small businesses, or measures of help-wanted or job 
availability. We expect to see increasing signs of hiring in the months ahead as businesses grow more confident of the recovery.  But anecdotal reports suggest that businesses remain very cautious.  If that caution persists longer than we expect, hiring could remain weak and slack in labor markets could fail to recede to the extent we are projecting. We made only very minor adjustments to our inflation projection this round.  The incoming data on overall PCE prices were a bit above our projection.  But the surprises were almost completely the result of a somewhat faster pass through of crude oil and natural gas prices to the retail level and higher than expected nonmarket prices, which we think have little signal content for underlying inflation.  As a 
consequence, although we have revised up the projected increase in total PCE prices in the current quarter by  percentage point to 2 percent, we have revised down the projected increase in the first quarter by nearly the same amount to about 1 percent. The increase in energy prices that was reported in this mornings PPI release surprised us to the upside, but in the past, producer prices for energy have been a pretty noisy indicator of developments at the retail level, so we are withholding judgment pending tomorrows CPI release.  Unlike PPI energy prices, the PPI for medical care does feed directly into the PCE price index, and these prices were a little lower than we had expected, shaving perhaps a tenth or two off our projection for core PCE inflation in the fourth quarter. Looking beyond the near term, we revised up our forecast for core PCE prices by a tenth in both 2010 and 2011 to reflect somewhat higher projected import prices and 
      a slightly smaller margin of slack.  Reflecting these revisions as well as some change in the profile of energy prices, we lowered projected overall PCE inflation by a tenth in 2010 to 1.3 percent and raised the projection by two tenths in 2011 to 1.2 percent.  Nathan will continue our presentation. MR. SHEETS. The foreign economic recovery has continued to broaden and deepen. We now judge that real GDP abroad expanded at a 4 percent rate in the third quarter. The emerging market economies (EMEs) continued to lead the rebound, with growth strengthening in the third quarter to a 9 percent pace.  Notably, the Mexican economy bounced back vigorously, as it shook off the restraining effects of the H1N1 virus and as automotive production there resumed.  Third-quarter growth 
in emerging Asia stepped down from the 15 percent surge in the previous quarter but remained near 10 percent, as activity in the region continued to benefit from policy stimulus and the rebound in global trade.   In the advanced foreign economies, real GDP growth turned slightly positive on average in the third quarter, after five consecutive quarters of contraction.  But the bad news is that final domestic demand 
remained quite sluggish in many of these economies, including the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Japan. Fourth quarter data suggest that growth in the EMEs is moderating to a more sustainable 5 percent pace, which we believe is likely to continue through the forecast period. We note that the vigor of the recovery in emerging Asia has kicked off rebounds in asset prices in the region and led to concerns that bubbles may be 
forming.  While the city-states of Hong Kong and Singapore have seen marked increases in real estate prices, property prices in other Asian economies are flat or up only moderately, and forward-looking priceearnings ratios for equities are within historical ranges. Of course, we will continue to monitor this issue closely going forward. For the advanced economies, we forecast that growth will strengthen from just under 1 percent in the third quarter to over 3 percent by 2011.  We expect that private spending in these economies will eventually pick up, boosted by normalizing 
financial and credit conditions, improving economic sentiment, and the ongoing recovery in the United States. The possibility that private spending in the advanced economies might rebound more slowly than we now envision is an important downside risk to our outlook, both for these economies and for export-dependent emerging markets. This month marks the 20th anniversary of the peak of the Japanese equity bubble, and policymakers there continue to struggle to find a formula that will allow the economy to shake off its sustained malaise. Japan was hit hard by the collapse in global trade during the crisis, but the country is now recording a strong rebound in its exports to emerging Asia, and its banks did not have the same exposure to toxic financial assets that has plagued many other advanced-economy banking systems.  Nevertheless, the prospects for Japanese recovery remain quite uncertain.  After an encouraging second quarter rebound, Japanese GDP growth slowed to a meager 
      1 percent pace in the third quarter.  Private demand continues to be soft, held back by weaknesses in labor and housing markets.  The recent strengthening of the yen is another source of restraint, and headline consumer price deflation intensified to a record 2 percent in October. Apart from our concerns about the apparent intensification of Japanese deflation, we expect that foreign inflation will remain well behaved through the forecast period, averaging around 2 percent per year. This projection is shaped by ongoing evidence that inflation expectations abroad are generally well anchored and by our view that economic slack will remain sizable in many countries, even at the end of the forecast period. In addition, in line with quotes from futures markets, our forecast calls for commodity prices to be relatively well contained going forward.  Since your last meeting, the spot price of WTI [West Texas Intermediate] oil has fallen $10 per barrel, to about $70. A portion of this decrease was unique to WTI, but last week the prices of other grades of oil posted notable declines as well. We continue to watch for signs as to when the foreign authorities will withdraw policy stimulus.  On the fiscal front, new governments in Germany and Japan announced measures that should give some small additional support to their recoveries and that signal a continuing commitment to stimulative policies.  However, the potential constraints on fiscal policy were underscored by the credit rating 
agencies recent moves to downgrade Greek sovereign debt and to place Spain and Portugal on negative watch, in response to concerns about the sustainability of their respective fiscal positions. S&P [Standard & Poors] yesterday joined Fitch in downgrading Mexicos credit rating to BBB, citing the countrys diminishing oil production, failure to expand its narrow non-oil tax base, and diminished prospects for fiscal reforms during the second half of President Calderns term. As for monetary policy, the Bank of England increased its asset-purchase facility by 25 billion, and the Bank of Japan introduced a three-month lending facility.  Although the European Central Bank announced plans to begin winding up its exceptional liquidity support facilities, markets seem to have pushed back a bit the expected start of monetary policy tightening by the ECB and other major central banks. Our forecast calls for the Bank of Canada to begin tightening policy in the second half of next year and for the ECB and BOE to follow suit in early 2011.  We anticipate that the BOJ will keep its policy rate at 10 basis points through the end of the forecast period. The foreign exchange value of the dollar fell through the month of November but has since rebounded vigorously on stronger-than-expected U.S. data.  On net, the dollar is little changed since the last FOMC meeting.  The dollars moves against the 
yen were particularly marked, as it traded briefly in late November as low as 
85 against the yen, prompting market chatter that the Japanese authorities would intervene to forestall further appreciation of their currency.  The dollar subsequently rallied, closing above 89 against the yen, down less than 2 percent over the intermeeting period.  The dollar also declined against the Korean won and the 
    Mexican peso, but moved up against the euro, the Swiss franc, and the Brazilian real. Relative to its peak in early March this year, the nominal broad dollar index is down 12 percent, but it still remains roughly 7 percent above its 2008 trough.  Our forecast maintains the working assumption that the real broad dollar index will depreciate atroughly a 2 percent pace on average over the next two years. Last week, after the Greenbook went to bed, we received the October trade data.  Exports showed greater-than-expected strength; the gains were broad-based, but 
particularly large for capital and consumer goods.  In response, we have marked up our projection for fourth quarter export growth by nearly 4 percentage points to a robust 16 percent clip. Imports also surprised on the upside, albeit to a lesser extent.  The upshot is that net exports are likely to add  percentage point more to GDP growth in the fourth quarter than we anticipated in the Greenbook, bringing their contribution to  percentage point. Going forward, export growth should proceed at about a 9 percent pace through the next two years, stimulated by declines in the dollar and the ongoing rebound in foreign activity.  Import growth is likely to be a bit slower, in the ballpark of 7 percent, supported by the U.S. recovery but restrained by headwinds from the dollar.  Because imports grow from a higher base, however, the contribution of net exports to U.S. GDP growth is expected to be roughly neutral over the forecast period.   Thank you.  That concludes our prepared remarks.  Were happy to take your questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. Are there questions for our colleagues? [No response.] Seeing no questions MR. PLOSSER. Its hard to know how to take that restrained enthusiasm in this report.   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Coffee awaits. [Laughter]  One small item:  We need to approve the domestic operations. MR. KOHN. So moved. MR. WARSH.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection.  All right. Why dont we take a coffee break and come back in about 20 minutes? Thank you. [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why dont we recommence and begin our go-round?   President Rosengren.  
 MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have had some heartening news since the last meeting.  In particular, the employment report was stronger than most analysts expected, with the economy losing only 11,000 jobs.  However, it is obvious, but still important, to emphasize that this is still moving in the wrong direction.  As the recovery progresses, a good employment report will be one that adds jobs substantially faster than growth in the labor force, so we can make significant progress in reducing the unemployment rate and reattaining full employment. The Greenbook has the unemployment rate at 9.6 percent at the end of 2010, with an assumption of no change in the federal funds rate.  Unfortunately, my own forecast is quite similar.  Initial claims for unemployment insurance remain quite elevated.  We need to see a significant reduction in job loss and a marked increase in hiring if we are going to achieve net increases in employment that significantly exceed growth in the labor force.  Other labor market trends highlight why the progress is likely to be slow in bringing the unemployment rate down.  First, the fraction of employed persons working part-time for economic reasons is nearly at an all-time high for the series.  Second, the workweek of production and non-supervisory workers remains low relative to non-recessionary periods.  With many workers on a reduced workweek, or involuntarily on part-time work, many businesses will defer hiring new employees until their existing workforce is more fully utilized.  Thus, even if GDP growth exceeds potential, as I expect it will over the coming quarters, this will likely reduce the unemployment rate only gradually. Headwinds from the banking sector are also likely to continue to blow strongly.  The percent of bank assets in institutions with low supervisory ratings continues to grow, and bank failures are artificially being held down by resource constraints at the FDIC.  Given the volume 
   of problem loans and problem banks, it is probably time to have a Resolution Trust Corporation to deal with failed bank assets. Recovery in commercial real estate will be delayed if the public and private sectors hold large inventories of problem commercial real estate loans in the hope that losses will be avoided through forbearance. On the inflation front, there is little evidence of inflationary pressures.  A variety of models used by the Boston Fed expect continued disinflation.  For models that depend on resource slack, the very high unemployment rate relative to any reasonable estimate of full employment suggests further disinflation.  However, recognizing the difficulties in measuring unemployment and output gaps, we have also examined models that emphasize the role of real marginal cost.  Here, too, one would expect significant disinflation, because real unit labor costs have been falling dramatically and are currently at a postwar low.  With double-digit unemployment, I dont expect a quick reversal in real unit labor costs.  Furthermore, our model suggests that, even in the presence of extremely well-anchored inflation expectations, the downward pull from resource underutilization may well outweigh the stabilizing effect of anchored expectations. Thus, while the high-frequency data have clearly improved from earlier this year, they have not changed enough to significantly alter the outlook of an economy with very weak labor 
markets and a significant risk of further disinflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District business conditions are showing modest improvement, according to many business contacts.  However, business leaders 
remain very cautious about the outlook for the economy.  This is affecting business behavior 
with respect to capital expenditure plans for 2010, and it is also having a big effect on hiring 
 plans. The cautious mood is typically attributed to three factors.  One is weak demand for final products, although that aspect is improving modestly.  The second is uncertainty over the scope and nature of national policy changes, as often cited by business contacts.  One contact said in a meeting, Tell me what the rules are; tell me what the tax rates areI will proceed with business planning then and only then. The third factor is a residual pessimism concerning the direction of the economy over the next two years, worries that the economy simply will not recover as it has in the pastthe idea is that something fundamental has changed in the economy and may not be in the process of repair. Energy firms in the Eighth District report weak conditions in the U.S.  Low energy usage and high levels of inventory accumulation are leading to continued cuts in hours in employment in that sector. In Asia, in contrast, the energy sector is very robust as we heard earlier in our report on the international conditions. Large transportation firms in the District report increasing volumes for the first time in a long time, as well as increasing revenues.  These firms have been surprised on the upside regarding Christmas activity.  Theyve had to scramble to meet transportation demands, especially from Asia, in recent weeks. Banking conditions are generally weak in the Eighth District, as Im sure they are across the country. Commercial real estate remains a huge concern.  Bankers generally felt that the FDIC does not have the resources or a plan to close banks as rapidly as necessary in the current environment.  Many contacts are worried, in addition, about a looming crisis in state-level 
financing. I have heard earfuls about that problem. On the national outlook, it looks as if we remain on track for a strengthening economy in 2010. I was encouraged by the strength of the November employment report.  Despite the drop 
 in jobs, it was much less than expected.  I think its reasonable to expect positive payrolls in the first months of 2010.  Positive GDP growth in the third quarter, and apparently now in the fourth quarter, suggests the recession has ended in terms of rule-of-thumb metrics.  But I want to remind the Committee, because employment is only now turning the corner, the actual recession 
end date may be closer to the end of 2009, as opposed to mid-2009.  This issue has an arbitrary flavor to it, but it does affect popular perceptions of the state of the economy, as well as both consumer and business expectations. Financial market stress continues to abate.  Its important to remember that some stress does remain.  If we were comparing January 2007, a pre-crisis date, to today, without the intervening period, we would be amazed at how much financial market stress was out there.  We would be saying that financial market stress is well above normal compared to that benchmark.  Its only because that stress was so high last fall that it seems relatively less painful today.  Still, Im encouraged by the improvements that weve seen, and I expect further improvement in the first half of 2010 in financial markets. I think an important question for the Committee, and for the outlook, is:  Could financial market turmoil somehow reemerge?  Weve seen a little bit of trepidation in the intermeeting period with events in the Middle East. I think it could reemerge, although the levels of government guarantees worldwide that were implemented during 2008 and 2009 suggest that markets are unlikely to panic as they did in 2008.  But I dont think that risk is completely down to zero. On the inflation side, I think inflation risks remain confined to the medium-term, anywhere from two to five years from now.  Actions we take today and through 2010 will shape 
those risks. I would stress again that current policy is completely unprecedented in the postwar 
  U.S. period. Uncertainty is high, both around this table and in financial markets, on what the effects of our policies will be. Econometric analysis using data from the last 25 years is unlikely to provide a completely reliable guide to possible outcomes in this situation. On balance sheet issues, as I have said before, I still prefer that the Committee take a more active stance on managing the balance sheet going forward.  I thought the memo from the Desk and Brian Sacks discussion today on runoff issues for the balance sheet made it clear that there is nothing optimal about pursuing any of the passive strategies.  These are just possible strategies that we could pursue, but an optimal strategy would somehow talk about how we were going to react to the incoming information on the economy during the period of zero interest 
rates, which, according to the Greenbook, will still be most ofor all ofthe next two years. The idea of taking a completely passive approach to balance sheet issues is very much counter to all that we have learned about optimal monetary policy over the last 25 years.  The asset-purchase program, at least according to the analysis by staff, is thought to have an important real effect on the economy.  So my question is:  Why ignore these effects when developing plans to get the balance sheet back to normal size over some time horizon? If the economy performs better than expected, we may want to normalize the balance sheet sooner than 
2016, or later, as would happen under a passive policy.  If the economy performs worse than expectedsuppose we are back in recession next fallit seems clear that we would want to expand purchases further. And let me reiterate the amount of uncertainty that is inherent in any forecast.  If you just look at the staff estimates of uncertainty, for instance, 6 percent real GDP growth in 2011 is actually within the Greenbooks 70 percent confidence interval.  So thats one possible outcome, and it is not an outlandish outcome.  When you get nine months, a year, 18 months down the 
 line, the economy may look very different from what it looks like today.  And we have to have policies in place to be ready for those types of possible outcomes. Announcing the end of the asset-purchase program in the first quarter of 2010 is not as transparent as I would like, because it suggests that we would not take further actions, when in fact we would in certain states of the world, as long as interest rates remain near zero.  So it would also be helpful to be able to make smaller adjustments meeting by meeting as information arrives on the state of the economy, as we would with our interest rate instrument. Finally, if we can, we would like to move the unsavory assets that have caused us some trouble off the balance sheet faster than current projections envision, but in a way that would still support recovery. We could do that in one of two ways.  We could replace them with Treasuries, which was discussed a little bit earlier, or we could just sell them outright, as appropriate, but in a way that would not upset financial markets and cause a backup in rates.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity in the Third District has remained slow, but there has been some improvement in a number of sectors, including manufacturing, retail sales, and residential real estate.  The outlook by our firms continues to be for low levels of activity, but most of our contacts say they believe that conditions have bottomed out and will improve, but they remain very cautious about the future. Let me start with some very good news, which seems appropriate in this holiday season.  Our manufacturing surveys general activity index in November rose for the fourth consecutive month, up to 16.7 from 11.5 in October.  Our December survey, which will be released, and, therefore, is embargoed until Thursday at 10:00 a.m., also shows an increase, up to 20.4.  Another positive note was delivered on the employment index of our survey, which moved from 
negative territory, where it had been for many, many, many, many, many months, into positive territory for the first time, at 6.3.  Both of those numbers seem consistent with a steady improvement in the general activity index, and the growth and positive number for employment were particularly encouraging. Retail sales in the District improved slightly in November for most of our stores and most lines of merchandise, including autos, which had dropped off at the end of the cash-fo
clunkers program.  The retailers we spoke to are cautious about holiday sales.  They are keeping inventories leaner and moving to lower-quality items and, therefore, lower-priced merchandise, which is going to make it a bit more difficult, I think, to interpret the retail sales numbers going forward. Employment in the three states continues to decline, but the rate of decline has slowed considerably, consistent with that in the nation.  We dont have the November employment numbers yet, but, so far, for the last 12 months, the pace of job losses in each of our states has been less than that in the nation. And the tri-state unemployment rate is only 9.2 percent in October, a full percentage point below the national rate.  Well seecan I use word gap? if this gap is maintained when the November numbers come out next Friday. The commercial real estate market remains weakno surprise there.  Our contacts expect construction and leasing to remain at low levels well into next year.  This matters for many banks in our District, because they have exposure to, and are responding to, and not lending to, developers. Indeed, bank lending continues to contract across all categoriesconsumers, businesses, and real estate. Bankers report that the declines, though, reflect both supply and demand factors.  They have tightened credit standards, although most seem to suggest that they are not continuing to tighten credit standards; that is, the bankers we spoke to seem to be 
 comfortable where they are for now. Lending is down, but it seems to be as much a lack of demand as a lack of credit supply, especially to businesses.  Most banks reported continuing deterioration in credit quality across all loan categories, but some said the rise in delinquencies and defaults appeared to be slowing.  I would note that in the NFIB survey that came out about a week ago, small businesses ranked the lack of demand for their goods as a much bigger problem than the lack of credit. As demand rises more generally in the economy, the credit quality of these firms is likely to improve, and they will increase demand for loans, and lending will be forthcoming as their credit quality improves.  That will be a natural part of the cyclical response of a recovering economy. At the national level, my reading of the data is that the improvement in economic and financial market conditions appears to be gaining momentum, and the likelihood that recovery will be sustainable has increased.  Indeed, I think conditions in financial markets have improved more quickly than many of us had predicted.  Weve been lucky that some of the downside risks we saw a year agoincluding the possibility of steeper-than-expected house price declines, and no improvement in equity pricesdidnt happen, while some of the upside risks, including faster-than-expected growth abroad and a more rapid decline in the dollar, did, in fact, occur.  So sometimes we have to take the good news when it comes, and it may be smarter to be lucky than 
its lucky to be smart sometimes. Employment, retail sales, housing, and manufacturing activity continue to improve.  The November employment report was quite encouraging in this regard and doesnt appear to have been driven by seasonals or even one particular sector.  The pace of job losses has slowed pretty significantly over the past few months, and initial claims for unemployment insurance, including both the state and federal programs, have moved down.  Households seem to have made 
 significant progress in getting their balance sheets more in order, and consumer spending has picked up more than expected.  Caution, low sentiment, in addition to tight credit, may be holding back some of the spending, but that could easily change if improvements in labor 
markets continue.  In the Greenbook, consumption is forecast to grow less than real income, but given the low level of consumption, this would actually seem to be an upside risk in the forecast. Private sector forecasters have been revising up their forecasts based on recent data.  I think it would be prudent for us to recognize that the recovery may be more robust than we had been expecting and that the equilibrium real rates of interest may rise faster than anticipated.  If so, we will need to be ready to begin reducing the degree of monetary policy accommodation sooner than later, which means we may want to begin signaling this in our statement.  As real rates rise, the opportunity cost of banks holding on to vast excess reserves may lead to a rapid increase in the money multiplier and a conversion of excess reserves into loans or borrowed money. This may happen very quickly and require a rapid response on our part, and we should anticipate this with the language in our statements, so that we dont get caught off guard.  Thus, I see a greater upside risk in the medium termthe two- to five-year termto inflation than the Greenbook does. Inflation expectations for now remain stable.  Im encouraged by that.  But, 
again, oil and commodity prices have begun to rise again. Who knows their effect on 
expectations going forward?  We must be cautious in our interpretation of those events.  Similarly, the fall in the dollar, while positive for growth, may be signaling increased inflation expectations.  All this reinforces my view that we are likely going to have to begin withdrawing some of this extraordinary monetary policy accommodation that we have put into place sooner 
than anticipated in the Greenbook baseline forecast. 
   And we will need to begin communicating this possibility to the public.  Otherwise, we may find ourselves behind the curve and unable to raise rates in as timely a fashion as we may desire, because our language will have constrained us.  As growth rates rise, we are going to have to allow interest rates to increase and not take those increases as signals of market dysfunction that need policy intervention.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The sentiment of directors and contacts in the Sixth District supports a modest recovery scenario.  In the most recent cycle of board meetings, surveys, and calls, I heard views that suggest an improving but still quite fragile economic reality.  We collected a number of comments that represent color, and not much that raised doubts about the modestly better conditions.  We heard reports of better retail spending for appliances and building materials.  This was confirmed by last Fridays retail sales estimate.  Retail sales improvement, however, seems to be tied to deep price discounts, and we heard retailers are not building inventories in anticipation of a sustained spending pickup.  We heard that retailers are prepared to lose sales for lack of in-store inventory. We also heard reports that temporary hiring has increased, and that, too, was reflected in the most recent employment report for November.  Temp agencies told us that they are seeing 
growth in higher-level administrative jobs.  Anecdotal feedback also supported the story that President Bullard pointed outthat policy uncertainty about health care, taxes, regulation, and cap and trade is feeding a very cautious approach to business investment and hiring. The Atlanta Banks economic growth and recovery forecast continues to foresee a path to the downside of the Greenbook outlook, particularly in 2011 and 2012.  Notwithstanding some better-than-expected incoming data, I am holding to the view that there are formidable and very 
   likely persistent suppressing factors that will inhibit a buildup of growth momentum.  Our greatest concerns are centered on business investment and the impact of commercial real estate value contraction on bank credit to smaller businesses, which ultimately affects job growth. We looked more deeply at the inventory and the commercial real estate-related concerns during the intermeeting period and did not find reason to adjust our forecast assumptions.  We found that, while inventories are lean in a few retail categories, significant excess inventory remains in many manufacturing categories. We also found that there is a strong coincidence of banks with commercial real estate exposure in excess of three times capital and small business loan share. An implication of the Atlanta Banks outlook is very slow progress on unemployment and underemployment. As regards price stability, I remain of the view that upside inflation risk is not much of a concern for the near and medium term.  I find it hard to pinpoint a source of broad inflationary pressure and see some indications of disinflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As pointed out by First Officer Murdoch and his shipmate, Nathan Sheets, [laughter] we have seen some rather startling economic data recentlya less negative unemployment report, just to take President Rosengrens interpretation, and some indications of improved consumer dynamics and a much improved international 
economic growth scene.  Financial markets, I think, are robust.  Key spreads have continued to narrow. Weve had some major announcements regarding TARP repayments and some 
significant nonfinancial transactions involving firms mainly in my District, for example, Buffetts acquisition of Burlington Northern and Exxons deal with TXO announced yesterday.  These developments are encouraging.  They indicate to me the recovery is under way. 
 But Im still in a trust but verify mode, mainly based on the anecdotal evidence that Im picking up, which is mixed, from my contacts.  Im beginning to detect a faint demand-pull heartbeat among bulk shippersair freight operators like UPS and Federal Express and the rails.  Long-distance telephone usage is up slightly year over year.  Thats always an interesting sign, in this case driven by call center activity. And yet the retailers report sequential slippage month over month and year over year for December thus far, with Wal-Mart and Penneys especially concerned about the bottom three income quartiles for Christmas and for the first half of the year. Pricing power, as I think Dennis just referred to, eludes producers in most sectors.  Retailers who look back at their Black Friday actisensitive consumption, although I would note that the two large express shippers have announced increases in prices coming on January 4.  The announced number is 4 percentif you look at the way thats practiced, it will probably be a net rate of 2 percent.  And there are reports that Wal-Mart and other large merchants are using a little bit of pricing power in order to protect their margins. One worrisome development that I have heard about is in retail supply.  Chinese suppliers to retailers are attempting to renegotiate the price concessions for soft goods for 2010.  Most of the merchants report that they have rebuffed them, but they do not believe they can continue to hold off doing so into the second half of 2010 and 2011, as Chinese manufacturers margins are being squeezed by increasing labor costs, raw material costs, and inflation.  And the expectations are for a reversal in sign from a minus 3 to 4 percent for soft goods to plus 3 to 5 percent as we proceed through the second half of 2010, assuming that consumption holds up. 
 On the balance sheet front, I could detect no change in this go-round with my interlocutors.  The capital markets are pretty much wide open to the big boys who are still hoarding cash. Most, with the exception of energy companies, such as Exxon, which are focused on longer-term natural gasa play that they consider defensiveare sitting on large cash reserves. Few are expecting to expand their cap-ex domestically until both the political and economic skies are clear. As to the small guys, they continue to complain about the paucity of bank credit.  As to budgeting head count and other operating overhead for 2010, the new ubiquitous buzzwords are ZOG and NOG. The bias is towards ZOG, which is zero overhead growth, or NOG, which is negative overhead growth.  This will not likely change until they see the whites of the eyes of 
top-line growth in their revenues. It remains elusive.  Those who do see it are pursuing what is known in the parlance of consulting as the HOG approach, which is budgeting their overhead to half the overhead growth they would otherwise commit to, because of gnawing uncertainty and a newfound ability to drive higher productivity.  Thats the big business crowd.   The little guys, the small businesses, remain in a very defensive crouch.  Small businesses inventory investment plans are at historically low levels.  Their capital spending is on hold. Actual outlays and planned outlays are at record low levels.  More small firms, according to what I can glean, still plan on reducing employment than plan on adding to their 
payrolls. And as you have pointed out, Mr. Chairman, this is vexing, because we all know that, during recoveries, small firms typically account for a large share of employment gains.  Weve done some research on this at the Dallas Fed.  In each of the 1983-1984, 1993, and 2003 expansions, the vast majority of employment gains were generated by firms with fewer than 500 employees.  What we dont know is the degree to which cap-ex expansion of the larger firms 
 drives that growth in employment in smaller firms.  For example, El Paso Natural Gas has just announced financing for a pipeline. It will add 5,000 employees to its own payroll, but in building that pipeline, of course, you feed into the small businesses that provide the supplies to those employees and the construction of that pipeline.  To the extent that smaller firms are more reliant on bank finance, its obvious that their recuperative powers are being affected by tight bank credit. As to the larger firms that have come to access financial markets rather readily and are less constrained by bank financing, they still appear, according to my interlocutors, reluctant to expand overhead and especially agnostic as to the need yet to expand domestic payrolls. I will just add to what several presidents have already mentioned by using a specific reference. A CEO just came back from touring the world.  This is a company that supplies ten million small businesses with a vital component on the IT side, and his response after the trip was, Every country I went toIndia, China, The Czech Republic, Brazil, Vietnamsaid, What can we do for you? How can we help you?  Well give you low taxes.  Well give you a building. Well give you land.  I come back here and its, You cant do this, you cant do that, you cant do this, you cant do that. That attitude, Mr. Chairman, is definitely having a 
depressive effect. It has nothing to do with monetary policy, but it is holding back the desire to expand payroll and cap-ex and adding to the ZOG and to the NOG. As to the price pressure front, headline CPI rates have been increasing steadily these past few months.  The 12-month headline rate will soon turn positive, maybe with tomorrows report.  The Empire State data released today or yesterday indicate some building price pressure on what comes in the door, despite the weakness that was in that report.  Both core CPI and core PCE posted annualized one-month rates above 2 percent in October, and the 12-month rates have 
  ticked up to a little over 1.7 percent.  The direction of change from negative to positive might ordinarily ruffle a hawks feathers, but for now I remain unalarmed.  In part this is because of what accounts for the increase:  excise taxes on tobacco sales and a number of small items that are a bit obscure to me, other than the prices of new motor vehicles, such as the price index for consumption expenditures for nonprofit institutions, and two other dodgy financial service components, the price index for financial services provided by pension funds and the price index for financial service charges, fees, and commissions.  More encouraging to me is the fact that both the median CPI and the trimmed mean PCE show continued deceleration.  The fraction of components in the PCE registering price declines remains elevated and sustained.  According to our calculation, over the past 12 months the fraction of falling price components has averaged 40 percent compared with an average 32 percent from 1994 to September of 2008. Having said all of that, my outlook for economic growth has not changed.  I am not as pessimistic as the New York Fed appears to reporta number, by the way, which I note is strikingly close to what Goldman Sachs is forecasting.  [Laughter]  Nor is it as robust and optimistic as what the Board staff is projecting.  And given all that Im seeing now, I stick to my previous forecast. Im somewhere in between the two, and having said that, I dont think it is too early to begin to think of how we will deleverage our balance sheet and pull back the monetary accommodation we have provided.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Can I make an interjection? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I dont blame you. 
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Two things.  One, Mr. Hatzius, who is the chief U.S. economist at Goldman Sachs right now, did win the Blue Chip Forecasting award for accuracy this year. [Laughter]. MR. FISHER. Thats ex post, past tense. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And, two, I think I contributed something to his training.  [Laughter]. So its not surprising that our views are not that far apart. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am not sure I have ever seen President Dudley blush. [Laughter] Our information about the Fifth District economy has been somewhat 
mixed lately.  Surveys indicate the service sector is looking up.  The nonretail revenue index has moved back toward positive territoryits not there yethaving been quite weak for several months. The retail revenue index has edged into positive territory for the first time since the second quarter of 2007. Readings for employment in these two service sectors and expected demand six months ahead have also strengthened noticeably.  The manufacturing index has backed off its recent highs, however, and is hovering around the break-even mark.  Anecdotal comments suggest demand has stabilized in many firms after having recovered in the middle of the year, and exports are widely cited as a bright spot in the District.  Our survey measures of price trends remain stable at a low level. Nationally, at the last meeting I think most of us were expecting national data to show a moderately paced recovery.  The intermeeting data have generally been consistent with that or in some cases a bit better than expected, as many have remarked.  Payroll employment losses have slowed substantially, and, as is typical in recoveries, there were strong upward revisions for prior months. Initial jobless claims have fallen more than 20 percent in the last six months, and the 
  improvement in aggregate hours worked after so many months of stagnation was particularly useful. This stabilization in the labor market bolsters the outlook for consumer spending, I think.  Revisions that have added 1 percentage points to the level of personal income cumulatively also bode well for consumption, and these developments make the recent growth in retail sales look more sustainable.  The recent firming in net exports and residential investment are also 
supporting domestic production.  The strong ISM manufacturing readings for production and new orders are consistent with recovery in the manufacturing sector.  Because the Fifth District manufacturing survey led the ISM on the way up, however, it led the much smaller Empire State survey and Philadelphia surveys as well; its recent decline might be a reason for caution about the robustness of manufacturing at the national level.  Commercial construction is obviously a drag on economic growth, but those figures have not come in noticeably worse than expected, because expectations were so low to begin with.  So overall, Im expecting moderate growth to continue along the lines of whats in the Greenbook, but without as much disinflation. Having said that, I find it hard to get a bead on just how this recovery is going to shape up over the next year or so. I sense a degree of caution among businesses attributable to concerns about the shifting regulatory environment and potential health care and climate change legislation. Some of my colleagues around the table have remarked on that.  In addition, uncertainty about the future path of federal deficits, I think, looms over the outlook as well.  So economic growth might not accelerate much from here. In financial markets, rates on an array of short-term instruments have fallen since the September meetingT-bills, commercial paper, and short-term euro-dollar deposits, for example.  Meanwhile reserve balances have risen by more than $200 billion over the same period. This looks a lot like the quantitative easing we were expecting, and it may be partly 
 responsible for the decline in other medium-term rates as well.  Its not obvious that further easing was really needed over this time frame, as the outlook has generally been improving.  The magnitude of the effect seems to have been relatively small, however, and inflation expectations seem to have remained stable. The case for expecting further disinflation continues to weaken, in my view.  The Greenbooks forecast for 2010 core PCE inflation was marked up yet again this time and has doubled since March.  The 2009 core forecast has been revised up since then as well, as core inflation has failed to fall as expected. It looks to me as if the stabilizing effect of inflation expectations has dominated any depressing effect coming from gaps between output and statistical trends in output, but Im sure we will discuss this at greater length in our special topic tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Once again, my outlook and business reports have not changed very much over the intermeeting period.  Most of my contacts currently are seeing continued modest improvement in their businesses, but firms continue to be nervous about 
prospects for the first half of 2010, and theyre not making major new commitments right now.  That said, some are in the process of making marginal adjustments.  The temp firms said that 
they have now had three months of decent gains in orders, mostly for low-wage, light-industrial workers. Typically this is the first segment of their business to come back after a recession, and 
there were scattered reports from other contacts about some modest rehiring, though it is too early to see how meaningful these might be.  Largely, it is the biggest cutters of employment that are rehiring right now. On balance, most reports indicate that businesses have largely completed the employment and capacity reductions associated with right-sizing their operations for what 
  they expect, and when signals point more clearly to a sustainable upturn in the economy, they appear ready to make more definite commitments to ramp up production.  By the way, no one raised the specter of uncertainty over government legislation currently being contemplated, but if I asked them later, and I did sometimes, they said yes, but it was not the first thing on their minds. Financial conditions seem to have eased further in a number of markets.  Risk aversion continues to decline, and there are increasing reports of previously sidelined capital moving in the markets in search of higher returns.  Not surprisingly, the chorus of concerns regarding frothiness in financial exuberance seems to be growing, and I think you heard about this in Berlin, according to news reports, Mr. Chairman.  Although these warnings seem premature, a couple of them were interesting.  For example, my private equity director has noted several times that at least a few recent deals have included some of the troublesome features that we saw during the last boom:  interest rate toggles, light covenant provisions, and funding for dividend recaps. In exuberant times, these lax provisions came bundled together.  In recent deals only single provisions have been included. Still, he says he didnt expect to see any of these so soon.  In banking, however, there has been no change in the ongoing complaints and debates.  Small businesses say credit is overly tight, while bankers worry about creditworthiness, managerial ability, and examiners reactions to new lending. This divergence between conditions in capital markets and bank credit serves as a reminder that monetary policy is a blunt tool.  Monetary accommodation will flow to where it can obtain the best return, and it is difficult to predict when it will reach particular sectors.  Currently the liquidity is going to capital markets, and while it is helping banks shore up their balance sheets, it is not clearly finding its way into new bank lending. 
Turning to the outlook, business and household caution and restrictive bank credit will continue to be headwinds, but I expect these to abate more as we move through next year.  Overall, my forecast for real economic activity is about unchanged from last round, and we are looking for GDP growth rates over the next year and a half similar to those in the Greenbook.  With regard to prices, resource slack remains large, and inflation trends are still well below my guideline of 2 percent. At the same time, inflation expectations have remained within their recent ranges.  So my forecast for inflation is about the same as last round, with core PCE inflation flattened down a bit in 2010 to 2011 but then moving up to about 1 percent in 2012.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the last meeting Ive made relatively minor changes to my forecast for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation.  I expect the 
economy to grow only modestly over the next couple of years, with unemployment remaining inordinately high and inflation running below my preferred rate for a very long time.  Though Im not satisfied with this outlook, my concerns about the downside risks going forward have continued to diminish since we met in November.  A wide range of indicators shows improvement: interest rates have come down and equity prices have risen; consumer spending 
has picked up; home sales have risen smartly; and the global recovery has gained traction. The positive signs we have seen are welcome, as economic activity has fallen so far below where it ought to be. There is, of course, some range of opinion on the extent of slack in the economy.  Some of my directors characterize it as very large.  Others insist it is so massive that we will end up with a lost generation of people whose skills and labor market attachment atrophy from disuse. In this context, the November employment report was clearly good news, 
   and it now seems quite likely that employment growth will soon head into positive territory.  The workweek and temporary employment, both harbingers of future job creation, have risen, although as David noted, the JOLTS data suggest that hiring rates remain at an exceptionally low level. It is sobering to realize, however, that we need an extended string of strong employment reports for unemployment to fall in line with the Greenbook projection.  In the Greenbook, nonfarm payroll gains average about 260,000 jobs per month over 2010 and 2011, and this is still enough only to lower the unemployment rate to a still elevated 8 percent by the end of 2011.  As if the attainment of such gains werent enough of a challenge, we might need even larger job creation to bring the unemployment rate down under a reasonable alternative to the Greenbooks assumption about labor force participation.  The participation rate has fallen about a percentage point since the recession began, and the Greenbook assumes that participation will fall a bit more. Historically, however, participation has been strongly cyclical, and if over the next year the participation rate were to rebound by even half a percentage point, then we would need another 1.2 million jobs, 100,000 more per month, just to achieve the same slow decline in the unemployment rate. Last week I showed a forecast much like the Greenbooks to my directors.  Frankly, they were incredulous. Every single one of them thought we were overly optimistic about employment.  My contacts are more likely to be considering continued layoffs rather than any substantial hiring. Indeed, one of them said, Its become fashionable not to be hiring.  Businesses think that for the foreseeable future they can continue to meet sales demands with productivity improvements.  For the foreseeable future, their planning horizon appears very short. They remain shell-shocked and traumatized from recent events.  A couple of them 
 emphasize that theyre making plans based on what they see over the next three to six months, since they have little confidence looking beyond that horizon.  So, even though my contacts consistently see signs that demand is starting to recover, uncertainty remains high.  They remain focused on ensuring their survival and are hesitant to hire or invest beyond replacing essential equipment. For smaller businesses especially, financing conditions also remain an impediment to expansion. Credit is available, but nonprice terms, including collateral requirements, are viewed as onerous and unattractive. This is yet another reflection of the pervasive fear that businesses feel about making commitments that could come back to haunt them.  Moreover, even with the thawing we have seen in credit markets, events during the crisis have made firms keenly aware that they cant rely on financial market functioning.  So at least some of my contacts plan to keep more cash on their balance sheet permanently rather than deploying it. Of course, there are limits to the efficiency improvements that have boosted the aggregate productivity figures so spectacularly, limits to how much firms can expand production without adding employees or capital.  So when businesses become more confident about the future, they 
will eventually begin hiring in earnest and ramp up capital expenditures.  The question is how 
long it will be before this important element of confidence returns to our economy. The high degree of slack in labor markets is also making it harder to achieve what I view as a desirable inflation rate of 2 percent for core PCE prices.  Well talk much more about inflation dynamics later in this meeting, but one theme of the papers prepared for that discussion 
is how slack pushes down marginal cost, and weve certainly seen that in the data.  According to the employment cost index, compensation gains this year have been anemic, running 2 percentage points or so below their pre-recession rates, and the strength in productivity has 
  caused unit labor costs to fall markedly over the past year.  These disinflationary forces working through slack are at least partially offset by inflation expectations.  According to most available measures, inflationary expectations are reasonably stable at present. My staff regularly estimates a model that allows them to decompose the break-even inflation rate from TIPS into inflation expectations and an inflation risk premium.  Their model-implied expectations for inflation have fluctuated in a relatively narrow range during the last six months, although they are down noticeably at all horizons since the beginning of 2009.  Inflation risk premiums, in contrast, have risen since the beginning of the year and are now in the somewhat elevated range.  These estimates are consistent with the anecdotes we hear concerning the unusually large dispersion of opinion about the longer-term inflation outlook. All told, I agree with the Greenbook that the most likely outcome for prices is some further disinflation.  If this forecast proves accurate, I would expect uncertainty about the inflation outlook to decline and the inflation risk premium to recede.  The bottom line is that we are faced with a situation in which inflation is undesirably low, and, even with large monthly employment gains, the level of resource slack will remain high for an extended period.  In my forecast, the zero bound and the limits on unconventional policy constrain us from pursuing a more desirable and more expansionary policy for some time to come. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the structural challenges that our economy is experiencing and has ahead of it, Im relatively optimistic about the economy.  
Rather than discussing the national picture, because our District mirrors some of the national events, Ill focus on some of that information. 
  First of all, were experiencing some improvement in our manufacturing sector.  Its small but systematic, and we get fairly good reports back on our surveys.  Our retail sales reports are up across the District. This holiday season has been better than most people expected.  We are seeing some slowing down in job losses, as others have reported, certainly, across the region.  And even in our housing sector we are seeing modest improvements there as well.  Our ag sector is actually improving very nicely, with improvements in the international sales area, with goods sales to China, for example, and so our ag sector is really quite good right now across the region.  Even technology seems positive.  As one of our contacts described it, compared with the tech bubble bust, this has been a very mild event for them, so theyre much more optimistic as they go forward and think that they will have further strengthening moving from here. Its interesting in talking with some of these individualsits like listening to the FOMC.  Theyre optimistic, theyre doing pretty well, but theyre not quite sure, so theyre holding back, waiting for more certainty before they invest. And they have a good pocket of money to invest once they gain that confidence to pull the trigger, if you will.  That was striking in a number of conversations I had with some of the tech people and some of the others who were thinking about investing going forward. I think thats worth noting. As others have said, commercial real estate is really quite difficult for banks that are caught up in the commercial real estate cycle.  But, for our region, I think its also important to make some distinctions.  In the urban areas, where some banks have plunged into commercial 
real estate, theyre in deep trouble, and theyre not going to be able to make loans.  Theyre just hanging on. But theres another group of banks that did not plunge as deeply, and its a fair percentage of our banks. They have kind of the same issue that I talked about earlierthey have the money, but they want to be very careful, they dont want to get caught up in any false 
 recovery, and so they are being very thoughtful before they extend it.  Even though they have funds, their standards are fairly tight, and theyre also claiming theyre not seeing the demand from the small business, so they have both sides going.  But as the economy improves, I think a good number of them will be in a position to lend, even though there will continue to be a drag from the commercial real estate side. So overall I think we are on the right track.  Things are improving in our region, and I think I see that in the models on the national economy.  I have no major disagreements with the Greenbook, as we think about things going forward. I do want to note and make a comment on the issue that Jim Bullard mentioned.  I think that the approach of not reinvesting proceeds in the maturing MBS is a very good approach.  And I would tell you that, the way I look at it, even if you were to do that, in 2016 youd still have half your portfolio left. But its like phase 1 of this extraction process.  We talked earlier about raising the spread, letting these roll off, and then, depending on how the economy recovers, we might be more actively engaged in managing that portfolio down, if were permitted to do so, by circumstances, and we should be considering that.  Part of that, hopefully, will be discussed tomorrow, and certainly a big part of that will be discussed in January. And I look forward to both of those conversations. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am pleased to see the signs of improvement in the economic data we received during the intermeeting period, especially in the November employment report.  Nonetheless, I see the economy in 2010 as having little momentum and as challenged by a lack of business confidence.  My business contacts report that sales are up from earlier this year, but they dont see the momentum that is needed for a 
 sustained recovery.  Several of my contacts noted that recent growth is unlikely to be sustained, because it was driven by one-time gains.  For example, business has been picking up in several manufacturing industries, because they are replacing inventories at the wholesale level.  They indicated that wholesalers had not been restocking earlier in the year.  Inventory restocking is obviously welcomed, but if it is without a sustained improvement in final demand, it implies only a temporary strengthening in economic activity. My business contacts also expressed a general lack of confidence in the outlook. They view the current environment as so alien that most of them were uncomfortable providing an outlook for 2010. They tell me that their conventional methods for assessing their own business prospects are irrelevant in this environment.  On top of the uncertainties about the economic 
outlook, as others have noted, proposals for health care reform, financial reform, and the new environmental regulations, have the potential to affect business conditions significantly in the near future. I am concerned that this lack of confidence in the economys prospects for even the next few quarters is going to be a significant barrier to a more robust recovery.  Businesses continue to stress cash preservation and cost containment as their top priorities.  They report little incentive or motivation to invest in capital projects.  To quote one CEO, Were not going to invest or prepare for growth without orders in hand.  This issue of confidence was also raised in a recent discussion at our joint board of directors meeting, among the businesspeople and the 
bankers, on credit availability and bank lending standards. For large firms, which have access to the public debt markets, credit is now available on more attractive terms than earlier this year.  But, as others have commented, smaller firms, which rely primarily on banks, are complaining about the availability of credit.  Bankers expressed a 
lack of confidence in the values of their borrowers collateral as one of the main reasons that they have had to raise their lending standards. Many of the businesspeople criticized the higher pricing and tighter terms for lending as being based on unreasonable assessments of their businesses.  So they are losing confidence in banks as a reliable source for funds in the face of elevated terms and additional covenants.  These reports suggest that credit availability continues to be an impediment to growth, particularly if we are counting on small businesses to contribute to economic growth. My business contacts did have some good news, and that is that more firms are expecting to return to profitability.  With this improvement, several businesses reported that they would at least partially restore hours, wages, and benefits that had been cut when the outlook was more dire. These actions should aid GDP growth, even if they have little effect on the unemployment rate for a while. More broadly, the speed and scale of the cutbacks many businesses implemented earlier this year give firms substantial room to expand activities before they would have to hire any new employees. Weighing all of these reports and the recent data, I made only minor changes to my outlook. I continue to see weaker GDP growth in the current quarter and for 2010 than the Greenbook projection. I expect the unemployment rate to remain roughly unchanged in December, with only modest improvements through all of next year.  My projection for core PCE inflation remains low throughout 2010 before it gradually converges towards 2 percent beginning in 2011. My inflation outlook is based on the significant amount of excess capacity that we currently have and inflation expectations that remain close to 2 percent from one to ten years out, according to my staffs model for inflation expectations. 
 I continue to see the risks as balanced around my outlook for economic growth and inflation. The potential for the recent momentum in labor markets to continue is roughly offset by the potential for further restraints on credit availability.  For inflation, uncertainty remains elevated on either side of my projection.  This uncertainty is linked closely to whether or not inflation expectations remain anchored.  Overall, the economy is certainly in better shape than earlier this year, but it is still not clear to me that the economy has truly turned the corner.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the Ninth District, real economic activity has begun to recover, but slowly.  The basic sense among our directors and our Small Business Council is that the deterioration in conditions has ended.  Figures confirm this sense. Regional unemployment has stabilized, although at elevated levels.  However, our directors also expressed some skepticism about the degree to which this turnaround can be sustained without ongoing government interventions, such as the first-time homebuyer credit.  Our Small Business Council expressed strong concerns about policy uncertainty related to taxes, health care, and cap and trade. Nationally, the revised estimate of third quarter GDP growth was 2.8 percent.  This increase is better than the preceding four quarters of negative growth.  Nonetheless, output is well below its trend level if we assume that that trend grows at 3 percent per year, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2007.  The Greenbook predicts that GDP will rise by over 4 percent per year over the next two years.  Based on our Minneapolis models forecast, I believe that this prediction is somewhat optimistic.  But even if the Greenbook were right, GDP will be well 
below this 3 percent trend line through the end of 2011. 
  In terms of labor market conditions, the November employment report was heartening.  National unemployment has started to decline, and employment seemed to stabilize in November.  However, unemployment remains extremely high by historical standards, and I agree with the Greenbook that it will remain elevated through 2011.  The employmepopulation ratio remains at a 25-year low. The inflation front is more promising.  Inflation remains low.  Inflationary expectations, as measured by Blue Chip forecasts or TIPS spreads, also remain low.  My own expectations are similar.  Nonetheless, I am concerned about a tail risk of a low-probability but high-inflation outcome.  The size of the government debt held in the private sector has increased by more than 
30 percent in the past two years.  This rise in the debt can only be funded by future tax increases, spending cuts, or higher inflation.  Any uncertainty about the Congresss will to exercise the required fiscal restraint translates directly into uncertainty about current or future inflation. There is also good news in financial markets.  Thanks in large part to interventions by the Fed, key liquidity measures like TED spreads have returned to normal. Indeed, the option-adjusted spread between agency MBS and Treasuries has fallen to near historical lows.  This improvement in financial markets has significant consequences for policy.  Liquidity disruptions last fall served to segment financial markets in unprecedented ways.  In that environment, the LSAP played a valuable role by lowering risk premiums in the agency debt and MBS markets.  However, the return to normalcy in spreads across financial markets indicates the degree of market segmentation is, at a minimum, greatly reduced.  Without such segmentation, the impact 
of reducing our holdings of agency MBS or Treasury debt on their yields is likely to be muted.  I would, at a minimum, be supportive of not reinvesting the proceeds from the LSAP either from the agency securities or from the Treasury debt. 
Overall, the real side of the economy is recovering somewhat.  However, detrended GDP is well below historical norms, and unemployment is well above the historical norms.  And this characterization seems likely to continue well into 2011.  Inflation is under control and is expected to remain so, although the size of the government debt represents a possible large risk.  Financial markets continue to improve and are much stronger than a year ago.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic outlook has clearly improved since the previous meeting, and we all seem to agree on that.  On the real activity side, heres what strikes me as most meaningful:  First is a more solid foundation for consumer spending, as David Wilcox pointed outa higher underlying compensation trend, as well as slower job losses and rising hours worked last month.  Second is consumer spending 
gainscore retail sales in November were quite solid, for example, and real consumer spending looks likely to grow at a moderate rate this quarter.  Third, as Nathan pointed out, is trade improvement fueled by export growth, not just export growth on its own, but also supported by pretty strong economic expansion outside the U.S.  And, fourth is something that hasnt been mentioned yetit looks as if some of the TARP monies are going to be used to fund a modest jobs program, so the trajectory of fiscal stimulus may not be as steeply downward as we go through 2010 as we anticipated earlier. But I dont want to put too much weight on any of this.  First, I think much of this improvement was anticipated.  I think its more that were moving along the path that we expected, rather than we are moving to a distinctly better path.  Second, there are significant constraints in terms of credit availability, and I dont see any sign that those have changed very 
much since the last meeting.  Third, we still have a tremendous amount of political uncertainty about health care reform, financial reform, and tax policy.  In talking to our directors, they make it very clear that this is a factor influencing their hiring behavior.  Although job losses have slowed, this seems to be almost exclusively due to much slower layoffs than due to a pickup in hiring. So for the New York Fed, Richard, the bottom line is more confidence about the sustainability of the recovery, but still an expectation that the economy will slow a bit from the current pace in 2010. That said, I think the risks to our forecast are shifting towards the upside from the downside. We should also recognize that we face a very disappointing path for unemployment going forward. So even if the economy is on a somewhat stronger growth path, that would be very welcome right now, and I would argue we should not offset that with changes in our policy. On the inflation side, I think the outlook has not changed much.  We have TIPS five-year, five-year forward inflation measuresit may in fact be slightly higher than that, but its hard to know because the inflation risk premiums are hard to extract.  And some other indicators certainly show less anxiety about the inflation outlook.  For example, the fears about commodity prices and the dollar seem to have calmed down quite a bit since the last meeting.  Interestingly, the mid-month University of Michigan reading had an almost bizarre drop in the median one-year and five-year inflation forecastmaybe it was just a fluke, but it was interesting nevertheless. Given the large amount of federal borrowing and the imminent wind-up of our large-scale asset-purchase program, I am, frankly, quite surprised that long-term rates have not climbed more sharply.  And I take that as another sign that investors are either not that worried 
 about the long-term fiscal outlook or particularly worried about the risk of higher inflation.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We have had several encouraging signs about the strength and sustainability of the recovery, not enough to warrant a major change in the outlook, but were moving in the right direction.  My list is the same as the list that everyone else 
has read out. So, very briefly, private demand has been stronger, especially in consumption, supported by more income growth.  Business spending on capital equipment does seem to be moving a little higher. Growth is beginning to feed through to reduced job loss and higher hours, 
and financial conditions are improving in markets, with declines in bond rates, increases in stock prices, and securities markets are open to substantial capital-raising, albeit at still somewhat elevated risk premiums.  Foreign growth is a bit stronger on balance, so the pickup is global, its not idiosyncratic to the U.S., and it should support export growth. I think there are a couple of possible reasons for a slightly stronger outlook.  Some of it is pent-up demand perhaps.  The level of spending on consumer durables and capital equipment has been below replacement levels, although, in my view, the stock of consumer durables and capital was probably above long-term sustainable levels coming into the recession, reflecting an unsustainable level of consumption and investment; but wear and technological improvements 
are making updating and replacement more attractive for households and businesses. With the return of risk appetite in financial markets, financial constraints may be a little less binding than we expected, at least for those with access to securities markets where low policy interest rates are feeding through the cost of capital.  And markets are opening up to more securitization in selected segments, partly through the influence of TALF. 
   Capital reflows to emerging markets, along with expansionary fiscal policies abroad, are lifting asset prices and supporting income growth, especially in emerging Asia.  Still, in my view, incoming information has also tended to confirm the existence of several constraints on spending that are likely to keep the improvement in the economy gradual and the decline in the unemployment rate quite slow. The contribution of the rebound in housing will be much more limited than usual in a recovery, and the information weve gotten since the last meeting confirmed that starts and permits for single-family homes over recent months have been quite flat, and for multifamilies theyve dropped quite substantially.  Prices of homes have moved down again, at least by one measure, and oncoming foreclosures are likely to limit any gains in prices. And the vacancy rate is still quite high, indicating that there are plenty of existing homes available to meet demand and constrain new building. As many have remarked, bank credit remains quite tight, and growth in the money supply has been modest.  To date, theres little evidence that the huge quantity of reserves is materially affecting the supply of money and bank credit.  Spreads on business loans from banks widened further over the past three months.  Small businesses perceive credit availability to be quite limited.  Credit card rates have risen substantially; thats partly in anticipation of regulatory pricing constraints, but it does raise the cost of capital of households and small businesses.  And bank loans have continued to drop very, very rapidly. Many foreign economies may be constrained in the degree to which they will support faster global growth. Japan seems to be fighting against a strengthening deflationary trend amid enough concerns about the economic outlook there to foster additional stimulus from both the fiscal and monetary authorities.  I thought the staff forecast for Japan was on the optimistic side.  
  The euro area is threatened by sovereign debt crises across its southern tier and in Ireland, which at a minimum will necessitate a severe tightening of fiscal policies in many countries.  And its not clear how long emerging Asia can carry the world economy without exacerbating imbalances and worries about excessive credit creation and asset bubbles. To be sure, the repeated modest upside surprises to activity over the summer and fall do suggest some upside risk to the forecast.  It could be that confidence is gradually rebuilding, and theres a positive interaction with the financial markets that could gather steam.  But there are downside risks as well. We are removing a substantial number of governmental props to the financial markets and the economy over the next several quarters.  The mortgage market is a particular concern as we stop our MBS purchases.  The U.S. Treasury will be constrained in its backstop of the GSEs after year-end, and there will be no clarity on the ultimate fate of these agencies for some time, probably a year or more.  And some areas of securitization appear to be less ready to stand on their own than others, suggesting that some borrowers will face higher costs as TALF is terminated.  Additionally, the substantial support that fiscal policy has provided to spending will be winding down in the second half of next year, and questions about fiscal sustainability will constrain any new stimulus now or if the economy falters. In an environment of high unemployment and excess capital capacity, I expect intense competition among workers and businesses to keep costs low and the underlying trend of inflation stable at a low rate, that is, a rate below my objective and/or perhaps even trending lower. And I think the data on price movements that we have gotten over the intermeeting period broadly support this outlook.  Energy prices have lifted headline inflation in recent months, but oil prices have fallen considerably in recent weeks.  Import prices have also added 
some to inflation, but the most recent stabilization of the dollar should limit the extent of those 
effects. Core CPI increases have been relatively flat at a fairly low 1 percent on balance over the past six months. Core PCE has picked up a bit, but that reflects nonmarket prices.  Market-based core PCE has continued to go lower to around 1 percent.  The trend in unit labor costs remains downward, reflecting both strong productivity increases and damped compensation.  And there are some hints in the survey data that long-term inflation expectations may be moving down a little, although its too early to make anything of those surveys, and the market-based measures of long-term expectations remain at the top of recent ranges.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 
MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me spend most of my time on financial markets, with just a few words on the real economy, which I think are consistent with many of yours. At the last couple of FOMC meetings I, like several of you, argued that the next few quarters were going to be considerably stronger than the next few years.  I think we finally have some data that bear that out.  First, the remarkable melting up in credit and financial markets, which we have all been noting for quite some time, seems to be doing remarkable things to help 
get this economy going over the near term.  Second, is the jobs front, which President Yellen and many of you talked about.  I think the job creation story is both a function of near-term prospects and medium-term prospects, and if medium-term prospects are as uncertain as many of us have described, then we should not be so surprised that the job engine iseffectively dead perhaps 
overstateseffectively impaired for some time. While its difficult not to see some good news in the most recent labor market prints and unemployment prints, let me try.  Firings have certainly leveled out, but I do think whats happening on the small business stuff is more than just politicians approaching even-numbered 
  yearsit does appear to be much more substantial than that.  And the probability, as President Yellen said, that workers who lose jobs will spend more time out of work and the harm that could be doing to a generation of underemployed workers early in their careers strikes me as 
something that could well be structural and a cause for real concern. I remain concerned about other possible outcomes to the real economy in late 2010 and beyond. While the productivity surge has been more impressive than I thought it would be, its hard to know how much of these improvements are cyclical and how much of them are structural and enduring. Historically, early-stage spurts in productivity have been followed by rising unemployment, but maybe this time its different.  Maybe, amid the range of uncertainties, employment and even hours worked may be slower to rebound, which could extend the period of strong productivity gains and productivity-driven growth without doing much to make us feel much better about the labor market situation. On the financial market side, let me make reference to three themes.  At the last FOMC meeting, I think, we discussed the fact that the financial markets seem to be nearing an important inflection point with some real possible impacts on the broad economy.  So key theme number one: Is Dubai really about Dubai, and Greece really about Greece?  I think there are dozens of Dubais out there, that is, entities with the implicit support of their sovereigns, and I think the relevant question is: Are the expected consolidated debt-to-GDP ratios consistent or inconsistent with current funding costs?  Markets for now seem to be largely comfortable with sovereign credits generally and with sovereign support of off-balance-sheet liabilities.  Think of Abu Dhabi and Dubai, think of the EU and Greece, and there are very few spillovers across markets.  CDS for some of the sovereigns, as Brian mentioned at the outset, seem to be moving a bit, but I think we should be extremely worried about some nonlinear moves.  So I am skeptical that the current 
comfort in financial markets will hold.  Bond market prices globally may be masking disturbing trends, and, while the official statistics on government debt-to-GDP ratios and associated measures of liabilities are growing, if we added these implicit liabilities, the numbers really could be quite staggering. Think about the U.S. circumstance.  If we added the liabilities of Fannie and Freddie to the debt-to-GDP ratio here, our sovereign debt-to-GDP would double overnight.  Then if you go out into the medium term, the numbers become even more alarming.  I dont mean to take us back to the early days of the panic, but what if markets come to think of these off-balance-sheet liabilities as the SIVs off-balance-sheet entities, but this time of the official sector?  The average terms of many sovereigns funding, including our Treasury, have shortened throughout much of 2009, and the problems of maturity mismatch are not unique to the private sector or unique to the U.S. government.  So I wonder whether governments are properly gauging their true medium-term costs of funding; and if complacency is, in fact, finding its way into financial markets, we cannot discount the prospect of some of these nonlinear outcomes in the financial markets, which would certainly do great harm to the economy. Key theme number two, old money chasing old products.  So whats that reference? It looks to me as though what we are seeing in asset allocation is fund flows coming out of the money market and money market mutual funds and other assets that are yielding close to nothing, investors that are tired of earning zero as they see markets melting up around them, and they are investing that in assets.  But most of these assets are not new assets.  Theres not a 
tremendous supply of new issuance coming to marketfrankly, theres less new supply than I would have thought. Brian talked about the new supply of mortgage-backed securities being relatively scant.  I think that is true across a range of markets.  In some ways, we are seeing older 
vintages of assets getting bid up.  If I compare the refrains from the recent boom in asset prices with current conditions, we can all remember a couple of years ago folks showing up and saying, I have got $3,000 to pay for my mortgage payment this month.  How much house can I get?  The 20092010 version of that is an investor showing up and saying, I need LIBOR plus 400.  What am I buying today? So I would prefer, in general, to be seeing new money evaluating new products rather than old money chasing old products, but I think thats a sense of where we are. But all my themes arent negative.  So let me leave with a final positive theme in financial markets.  As Brian said at the outset, we have seen a couple of differing moves both in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and in commodity prices.  We saw this one-way bet on dollar and commodity prices, a weaker dollar, higher gold, higher metals, for much of the intermeeting period, but it has reversed over the course of the last ten days or so.  I happen to think that reversal is healthy.  I happen to think that a two-way market across these key asset classes is probably a good thing. A stronger dollar, commodities a bit weaker in the last ten days, and reaction to recent stronger data in the U.S. on payrolls and consumer spending, and more worries about European prospects tell me these markets are acting a little bit more as we had long thought they would.  They seem somewhat healthier in responding to relative growth rates and expectations of relative rate differentials, with the U.S., frankly, standing up relatively favorably against the U.K. and the European Union.  Before the last 10 days, many of these commodities were near multidecade highs.  Risks of one-way bets and even bubble conditions in certain assets, as a result, may be mitigated if what were seeing is something more than a head 
fake. I think those trends on the dollar and commodities are important to watch.  I think they likely offer an important view on what happens to inflation expectations going forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In general, the bankers are looking for some sign of the top in their credit deterioration, and, with the exception of CRE, everybody seems to feel like it is just around the corner, that they are very close, but nobody can support it yet with any real evidence. They expect that the nonperformers will peak in 2010 and charge-offs will peak in late 2010 or early 2011. Every banker I spoke withprobably because they were just coming out of or still wrestling with their 2010 profit planningwas focused on the need to find loans in order to generate income.  They said that the loans that theyre currently booking are of high quality.  Pricing actually has gone from being great to being simply good.  Theres widespread use of interest rate floors, and theyre beginning to see some competition both in rates and in terms.  Most are reluctant to add any mortgage-backed securities to their investment portfolios because theyre afraid of what happens when we stop buying or when we sell.  And a number of them are actually harvesting gains in their existing portfolio, because those gains are a significant part of 
their capital and they need to lock them up. Transaction volume is shifting heavily from credit cards to debit cards, and total transaction volume is up, while the average ticket is down, indicating that consumers are spending from money that they have rather than money that theyre borrowing. On the regulatory front, a number of them reported examiners not willing to follow the new CRE guidance. The reports to me were all about FDIC and OCC examiners, and theyre 
singularly unwilling to use any appeals process or ombudsman to talk about this with those regulators. None of them mentioned Federal Reserve examiners, and we could assume from that that there were no Federal Reserve examiners who were unwilling to follow the guidance, but I 
  think it would probably be better if we were vigilant with our own troops as well.  On the new overdraft rules, I talked to one bank that has estimated a 15 to 20 percent hit to earnings per share and has calculated that in the past the cost of providing checking accounts has been increasingly covered by overdraft fees, which led to a proliferation of free checking.  In order to reverse this to accommodate the new overdraft rules, the breakeven for checking accounts is likely to be somewhere around $10 per month per account. Ive been struck by the sharp decline in cost and the increase in availability of credit in the debt markets while the opposite seems to be happening in credit provided through banks.  So I took a look at loan volumes and found a very different story for the large versus the small banks. The larger banks typically have mortgage, credit card, large business, middle-market lending. The top 25 banks have 70 percent of the C&I loans, 73 percent of the mortgages, and 80 percent of the card debt.  They have made extensive use of Fed facilities, Federal Home Loan 
Bank, and FDIC guaranteed debt, and theyre much further along in emerging from the financial crisis. They do have access to capital markets and have repaid or are planning to repay their TARP. In contrast, the problems for small banks started later and are still building.  They have big construction and CRE portfolios. In fact, 60 percent of the total CRE loans outstanding are in the smaller banks.  They have 30 percent of the C&I loans, although those loans are predominantly to small businesses.  They fund through deposits, Federal Home Loan Banks, 
CDARS, and brokered deposits.  They have limited access to capital, and many of those who did not get TARP, either because they were not allowed to or because they elected not to, now wish they had it as they work through this CRE cycle and are finding problems. 
 Given the sharp reduction in bank lending, I took a look at loan balances in the third quarter of 2009 compared with year-end 2007.  While banks of all sizes have reduced loans, the big reduction has been in the top 20 banks that are just below the top five. For the top five, loans are down just under 2 percent. For the next 20, loans are down more than 10 percent, and for all others, loans are down about 2 percent. So theres a real concentration in those 20.  Inside of commercial real estate, the construction land development, where the portfolios have been hit the hardest, are down 25 percent in banks below the top five, while loans on existing nonresidential real estate are actually up across the board. Finally, I decided to focus on the two politically hot categories, mortgage modifications and small business.  To size the mortgage modification problem, 5.7 million mortgages are now 60 days past due with 2.3 million in the process of foreclosure, roughly equivalent to a years sales of existing homes.  I talked to one large lender servicer who was able to give me some breakdown in the HAMP. He said 20 percent are not owner-occupied, 20 percent have less than 31 percent DTI, and 20 percent dont qualify for other reasons; 10 percent are underemployed or unemployed.  Of the remaining 30 percent, half dont accept the offer.  Banks were encouraged to get the numbers up by putting people in trial modifications and then gathering the documentation during the trial period.  Of those who have made their payments, one-third have submitted all of their documents, one-third have presented partial documents, and one-third have submitted no documents. The banks are still modifying many loans outside of HAMP, but the loans previously modified are re-defaulting, and rising unemployment is working against them.  The clock is still ticking. Banks are now formalizing and streamlining short-sale processes and investing in 
staffing systems and training, but were still likely to see three to four million foreclosures.  
   However, they will be spaced out over two to three years due to all of the foreclosure prevention efforts, the timing of re-defaults, judicial foreclosure processes, and staffing issues. On the new loan front, Fannie Mae has now raised cutoff FICO scores for even 80 percent mortgages, which would potentially affect as many as 30 million borrowers.  The FHA is studying both FICO and downpayment requirements.  So even in the government-supported space, term tightening continues. Turning to small business lending, in the NFIB survey, 15 percent said credit was more difficult to obtain, which compares with a 12 percent level in 1990.  But only 5 percent ranked credit as their most important problemit is well behind weak sales at 33 percent, taxes at 20 percent, government regulations and red tape at 13 percent, and even the cost and availability of insurance at 8 percent. Our data on small businesses was last done in 2003, but at that point we estimated that only 1 percent of small business borrowing comes from the SBA.  With the SBA, the expanded loan guarantee program is now out of money.  Changes were made to increase the guarantee to 90 percent with a maximum loan size of 1 percent and allow refinancing of existing credit.  There is a House bill that would extend the program and increase loan sizes.  As you might 
expect, commercial banks are the primary providers of credit, supplying two-thirds of the total credit, but, of that, approximately 40 percent are borrowed under a commercial mortgage.  The smaller banks usually underwrite them individually, but they take some form of collateral, preferably real estate, to compensate for less reliable financial statements, the mixing of personal and business assets, and low capitalization. So I would estimate that at least half of the commercial real estate and more than 90 percent of the C&I loans in the smaller banks are small 
business loans. Larger banks are underwriting centrally using credit-scoring models and moving 
  to limit local overrides.  Theyre reporting losses similar to unsecured consumer credit, and the larger credit card issuers have now designed business card products to work like a traditional line of credit, but theyre concerned about the prospect of business lines coming under the same restrictions as consumer credit. We hear so much about businesses failing due to lack of credit.  I tried to find data on the rate of business failure. One bank had researched its own experience and found, to its surprise, that the rate of business failure was not substantially different from earlier cycles.  They have hypothesized that low rates have allowed businesses to hang on longer.  So the small business job formation problem appears likely to be a new business formation, with new businesses usually funded with personal borrowing and funds from family and friends rather than bank credit. Given widespread balance sheet impairment, I suspect new business formation to be quite low. While SBA programs might help on the margin, I concluded that the best assistance for small businesses comes from low interest rates, enforcement of CRE guidelines, and improving consumer wealth.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first say I know how pleased everyone must be that we are getting through the go-round this afternoon so that we will have plenty of time tomorrow for our special, though regrettably untelevised, version of Who Wants to Be an Inflation Fighter. [Laughter]  I have read the transcript. Developments since our previous meeting have obviously been positive, on balance, though not uniformly so.  The late-year improvement probably reduces somewhat further the likelihood of what I have previously characterized as a relapse scenario.  But even if this modest trend continues through December, I dont think a stronger than expected fourth quarter 
    fundamentally changes the outlook for 2010.  In this regard, there remains the important question whether or, more precisely, how much self-sustaining demand will fill in behind the withdrawal of stimulus over the course of next year.  For the reasons many of us have rehearsed at previous meetings, and that some of you have repeated this afternoon, the answer to this question is quite uncertain. One area that unfortunately looks all too certain is unemployment.  Even the most optimistic of private forecasters believe that unemployment will remain at very elevated levels throughout next year. Quite apart from the social and longer-term economic damage that may be effected by prolonged high unemployment, my intuition continues to be that a level of 9 or 10 percent places a significant limit on the growth of personal consumption expenditures unless one expects that compensation levels will themselves rise steadily. Obviously then the contribution of wealth effects would be important for a sustained acceleration in consumption, as, in fact, we see reflected in the forecasts of those who do anticipate stronger PCE growth. Here again, though, there is considerable uncertainty.  Indeed, I have noted that even those who sit together on the more optimistic end of the spectrum of forecasts for 2010 disagree on whether housing or equities will be the key driver of rising wealth. As to housing, at least, while I can tell the story of reduced inventories, lower prices, and less new home construction moving residential real estate eventually in a positive direction, I can equally conceive of such factors as more foreclosures associated with unemployment and a possible jump in mortgage rates associated with the end of our MBS purchases leading to stagnant or even slightly declining home prices. To be fair, I should also note that some on the more pessimistic end of the 2010 spectrum have been a bit undone by the revisions to 2009 data that revealed a higher saving rate than had 
 previously been assumed, thereby undermining the argument that saving will inevitably jump a good deal next year with consequent negative effects on PCE. But this example makes my point as readily as the cloudiness around the more upbeat commentaries. We are still learning exactly how the different characteristics of a deep, financially induced recession might confound expectations developed through experience with each of the recessions in the last 60 years, whether mild, moderate, or severe.  We will not have the luxury of waiting to see all these differences unfold as we make our policy decisions.  We will necessarily be navigating in somewhat uncharted waters, but to this point, I believe we have yet to see a credibly strong current flowing by us. My basic outlook is thus essentially unchanged from November, despite the noteworthy developments since that time.  Near-term prospects remain moderately positive, with the important major qualification of employment.  As to the second half of 2010 and beyond, a forecast of incrementally to moderately above trend growth remains the best bet, but I continue to see significant, though reduced, downside risks and growing, though still modest, upside risks as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I know youre all expecting a crisp, linear summary of the go-round, but I see that its past 5:30 [laughter], so why dont we adjourn for a reception and dinner, and well see you the first thing in the morning at 9:00 a.m.? Thank you. [Meeting recessed] 
                                                       2 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). December 16, 2009Morning Session Meeting attendees greeted Chairman Bernanke with a standing ovation when he entered the meeting room in recognition of his being named Time Magazines Person of the Year 2009. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The power of the media. [Laughter] Thank you very much. MR. WARSH.  A little extra pressure for your pithy summary of yesterdays discussion.  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We want to start today with Bill Wascher, who will give us some updates on data. MR. WASCHER.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We received two data releases this morninghousing starts and the CPIand you should have in front of you a three-page handout that summarizes the data.  The first page summarizes the housing starts data, and you can see from the top line that total starts moved up to an annual rate of 574,000 units in November, with increases in starts of both single-family and multifamily units.  The jump in multifamily starts, 
which is about halfway down the table, basically reverses a sharp dip in October, and that was in line with our expectations.  While single-family starts also increased, that increase was smaller 
than we were expecting. Permits, which are a better underlying measure of starts, increased more than starts in November. But the combination of the permits and starts figures in November was weaker than we were expecting, and it suggests to us that our near-term forecast for single-family starts is probably too optimistic.  While I would still think that a gradual 
improvement in new home sales will lead to a more noticeable pickup in the pace of starts next year, these data suggest that the upturn is lagging a little bit more than we were projecting.  The implications of these data for GDP are mainly for the first quarter, given the lag between starts and construction; these data, and our reaction to them, would probably take off a tenth or two of a percentage point from our forecast for GDP growth in the first quarter. The next page summarizes the data for the CPI.  The total CPI rose 0.4 percent in November, which is what we were expecting for the headline number.  However, energy prices rose a larger-than-expected 4.1 percent last month, while core prices were about unchanged in November; to two decimal places, they rose three basis points.  We had been expecting an increase in the core index of about 0.1 percent.  The softness was concentrated in prices of services, especially in rents.  In contrast, core goods prices rose 0.2 of a percent in November, with noticeable increases in tobacco prices and in motor vehicle prices. It looks as if yesterdays PPI release and todays CPI release, taken together, will imply a lower estimate of core PCE inflation in both the fourth quarter and the first quarter than we had 
 in the Greenbook. In particular, it looks as if well be down from 1.6 percent in the fourth quarter in the Greenbook to 1.2 percent for core PCE price inflation, and in the first quarter down from 1.3 percent to 1.1 percent.  For the total PCE price index, we would revise our estimate for the fourth quarter from 2.8 percent to 2.6 percent; for the first quarter, because of the higher energy prices, we would still be at 1.1 percent. Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Any questions for Bill? [No response.] Okay. I did have overnight to put together my pithy summary, so let me just try to summarize what I thought was a good discussion yesterday. Economic indicators since the last meeting were generally a bit more positive than expected. Participants cited the November labor report, retail sales, trade data, housing, and financial developments as positive.  Global economic growth is picking up, more so in emerging markets than in advanced economies, some of which remain weak.  However, although downside risks to growth may be a bit smaller, most participants were not ready to revise their expectations substantially for 2010 from previous projections of moderate growth and continued high unemployment.  Anecdotes repeatedly cited uncertainties on the part of business leaders about both near-term and medium-term prospects, reflecting questions about the economy itself and a range of government policies, including fiscal, climate, regulatory, and others.  These uncertainties, which are shared by the meeting participants, seem likely to retard new investment 
and hiring for some time.  Participants also debated whether private final demand will be 
sustained as government supports are withdrawn.  Housing provides an example.  Although there have been some significant improvements, these may not continue next year as the Fed stops buying MBS, the GSEs reduce their portfolios and tighten terms, the first-time homebuyer tax credit ends, and slow progress in mortgage modification fails to prevent another wave of foreclosures and distressed sales.  On the inflation front, price changes seem reasonably well 
  controlled, with some expecting further moderation, especially in core inflation, but others citing possible medium-term risks.   Looking at a bit more detail, recent data on consumer spending were encouraging, as noted. Income and saving this year were stronger than initially estimated.  Household wealth is increasing, and sentiment has recently improved some.  Evidence on Christmas buying is mixed.  Consumers appear to be aggressive in limiting ticket sizes and pursuing discounts.  Households 
were likely encouraged by somewhat better news about the labor market, but high unemployment seems likely to cap growth in consumer confidence and spending. In the labor market, elements of good news besides reduced job loss included increased hours, reduced unemployment claims, and more temporary hires.  However, although job losses have moderated, firms remain quite reluctant to hire, and conditions overall remain very weak.  
Extended high unemployment, which seems likely if growth is not much above trend, could leave lasting scars on the labor force. As also noted, CEOs remain cautious.  Large firms have good access to credit, but are holding lots of cash rather than hiring and investing.  Smaller bank-dependent firms find credit much more difficult to obtain, although there was some difference of view as to whether these constraints would prevent small firms from expanding when demand picks up.  Productivity gains have been significant, as firms have cut costs or looked to meet demand without adding workers. Certain segments are performing better, including some manufacturing businesses, high tech, and agriculture, and shippers have seen an uptick in their business. Financial markets continue to improve, although the risk of relapse cannot be ignored.  Some markets, such as securitization markets, are still not functioning well.  Generally, asset values do not seem out of line with fundamentals, although as investors have become less 
  cautious they may have also become less discriminating.  Market sentiment has been strong enough to overcome setbacks, like the Dubai episode, but this episode may be indicative of the vulnerability of sovereign credits.  Banks are raising capital and in some cases paying back the TARP. Bank credit, however, continues to contract, reflecting lack of demand, weak borrower quality, the risky macro environment, and bank concerns about their own capital positions.  Some banks complain about overzealous examiners.  Banks are looking for credit losses to top out in 2010, except in commercial real estate.  Large and small banks have different portfolio mixes, with small banks particularly vulnerable to the worsening CRE problem, and many are 
still likely to fail.  Small banks are also more likely to be lenders to small businesses. Inflation seems reasonably controlled.  Core inflation seems to be moderating, though the underlying trend is not entirely clear, not only because of some energy pass-through but also some special factors, including an increase in the prices of nonmarket components.  The median CPI and trimmed mean PCE inflation are flat to down.  Anecdotes suggest that firms have limited ability to raise prices in most cases.  Compensation figures were revised up, but wage growth in general still appears quite moderate, and unit labor costs are further reduced by strong productivity; that is, in terms of the models, marginal costs do not seem to be rising quickly.  
Inflation expectations are broadly stable, though inflation risk premiums increase the difficulty of extracting these expectations from TIPS. As has been the case, views around the table differed on the size of the output gap and its relevance to inflation determination.  Energy price increases and declines in the dollar have recently reversed. Medium-term risks, other than the Feds balance sheet, include the U.S. fiscal situation and import costs.  We discussed the structure of the Feds policy regime, including exit-sequencing and the development and communication of a policy rule.  Thats my overview of 
 what I heard. Obviously, theres diversity among the group.  Are there any comments or questions? [No response.] As always, its very difficult to add intelligent new and insightful ideas after all of you have already spoken, but let me just say a couple things.  First, like everybody else, I was heartened by the intermeeting data, and I think I may have taken just a bit more signal than some of you from it.  In particular, even though the overall economic growth in the second half was not much changed by the revised data, the contour was changed.  The third quarter was weaker, the fourth quarter looks to be relatively strong, perhaps 4 percent or more, and so there is a sense of somewhat more momentum going into 2010. At the same time, we saw developments, particularly in the consumer sector, which are a bit encouraging towards the view that, as inventory adjustments follow through and as other temporary factors weaken, final demand will be able to pick up and continue the moderate recovery that we anticipate in 2010. So, like most of you, I havent significantly revised my modal forecast, but I do have somewhat more confidence that the momentum will be sustained 
into Looking specifically at the consumer, a number of things were encouraging.  I think the simple fact that there was more demand for housing and autos is actually encouraging, not just in terms of total spending dollars but also because the willingness of consumers to commit to longer-term durable goods is in itself an indication of greater confidence in their own income and the future of the economy.  And, more generally, we did see improved attitudes as measured, for example, with the Michigan survey.  Althoughlets be carefultheyre still very low in historical terms, and though the current conditions index improved considerably, the expected 
conditions measure didnt do very much.  So we are seeing some improvement there, but, again, we should be cautious. 
     On consumer fundamentals, we have seen the upgrade of income, which, as some have noted, helps explain how you can consume more and save more at the same time[laughter] which has been happening.  And there are some positive developments, for example, in energy prices, which will help real income; in inflation expectations, which help expected real income; 
and in wealth. On the latter, as we saw in the flow of funds data, about a third of the losses have been reversed so far, so there is some continued improvement on that front.  Thats all positive, and it gives us more sense that the consumer will not fade as the handoff happens. On the labor market, I think we can find a few positive elements.  Weve noted a number of things from the labor market report.  I think, more generally, there are some indications that the recovery will not be as jobless as it was in the last two recessions, given the depth of the decline; therefore, theres likely to be a tendency for jobs to come back, given that the productivity gains weve seen are not sustainable and that theres going to have to be some mean reversion. So, if you put together moderate growth, likely weaker productivity gains, some strength in a few individual industriesmanufacturing and othersthe presumption is that we will see some job creation and some positive payroll numbers pretty soon. That being said, I think I would come back to the theme I echoed in a couple of speeches over the intermeeting period.  I still see the labor market and the credit market and the interaction between them as being major risks and drags on the expansion.  In the labor market, I think its really important for us to keep in mind what a deep hole were currently in.  To give two 
numbers that you dont always cite, the employment-to-population ratio has fallen from a peak of 62.7 percent to 58.5 in the most recent montha very substantial decline in the number of people working. The aggregate weekly hours of production workers has fallen more than 8 percent from the peak. Compare that with a decline of less than 6 percent in the 1981-1982 
   recessionthere has been an enormous decline in labor input.  And, as a number of people noted, starting with President Rosengren, that decline in labor input is not simply bodies; it is on other dimensions as wellhours per week, overtime, and so on.  And as was also noted, as labor input increases, it will happen across a variety of margins and not just on the unemployed.  In fact, given the duration of unemployment and the number of people who will be losing skills and labor force attachment, there may be some preference, as firms go out and look for workers, to expand on the intensive margin rather than on hiring people who will not be as attractive from the employers perspective.  Just to give you a sense, simple arithmetic says that an increase of 20 minutes in the average workweek is equivalent to one and a half million jobs in terms of labor 
input. So there is a very substantial substitutability across those dimensions. The second area that I talked about in my remarks over the intermeeting period, of course, is credit. It was noted around the table by a number of people that credit availability for large firms, including large banks, appears to be quite good, surprisingly good to some extent, whereas, for small businesses that are bank-dependent, obviously conditions are much more difficult. There was an interesting discussion around the table about how significant the constraints on small business credit will be.  A number of people noted that the NFIB surveys put small business views about tight credit as being only fourth or fifth on the list of concerns. But, remember, we are now in a period where, in some sense, the binding constraint is demand.  The 
question is: What will happen when there is scope for expansion, and will firms be able to get the credit they need to expand?  I think it is instructive to recall the post-19901991 recession period, the period of the famous financial headwinds, when banking conditions were much less severe than now. Credit extension was much better; NFIB indicators and the terms of credit from the survey of senior loan officersall of those things were less severe than they are today 
 in the economy. So my best guess is that we will see some concerns about credit as the expansion begins, and that will be a reason for more moderate economic growth. Contributing to that is that the situation is not like the post-19901991 period, where the problems fairly quickly resolved themselves over the subsequent couple of years.  Were continuing to look, as a number of people have noted, at still rising NPL rates, commercial real estate credit, and other issues that will put stress on the banking sector.  And, notably, Governor Duke made some very interesting points about the differences in product mixes between large and small banks.  In particular, small banks are both more vulnerable to the CRE problem and are a bigger source of credit for small businesses and local economies. Again, to summarize the two parts of my remarks there, the first was that I thought that the intermeeting data were encouraging, in the sense that the moderate growth scenario looks more plausible and the risks to it seem less. But I dont see a great deal at this point to suggest that economic growth will be much greater than the moderate pace scenario.  Going back to the jobless recovery theme, I think it is striking that the staff is projecting 200,000 to 300,000 jobs a month starting in the second quarter, with even more in 2011, and even so unemployment rates remain at 9.6 percent at the end of next year, for example.  So given those two things, given the depth of the hole were in, were going to need a lot of jobs to get back to more normal conditions. I think inflation conditions are fairly stable, though obviously not entirely satisfactory in all dimensions.  Over the intermeeting period, we did see oil prices down about $10, although 
distant futures prices did not change much, so that doesnt really change the trajectory very much. I was actually kind of encouraged to see the way the dollar has changed its behavior.  Weve had this funny pattern where, whenever theres a good day in the stock market, the dollar 
                                                      3 Materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). drops because of this safe-haven effect.  Since the November employment report, weve gotten a more normal positive correlationgood news about the U.S. economy is good news for the dollar. I think thats encouraging, because it means that economic growth will not translate immediately into those kinds of import inflation pressures.  People discussed the difficulties of interpreting the TIPS spreads.  My overall sense is that theres not a major shift in the inflation expectations of the financial markets.  Likewise, the surveys of forecasters and households are 
also fairly benign. So all of those things, I think, are moderately encouraging. That being said, I do feel we are, in some sense, walking on eggshells, because there are so many delicate issues of confidence in financial institutions, in our fiscal position, in the Feds policies and exit strategy, that there just seems to be a greater and pervasive sense of instability and risk, given what we have been through in the last couple of years.  But, again, I think overall the intermeeting period was good, and although were still a long way from where we want to be, were moving at least at some speed in the right direction.  So let me stop there.  Are there further questions or comments about the economy? [No response.] In my summary, I took note of our interest in discussing in January the elements of our policy frameworkhow we would think about exit and how we would think about communication and perhaps policy rules as well. So well be in touch with you about some of those issues. If there are no further comments, Ill turn to Brian to start the second round. MR. MADIGAN.3  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package labeled Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.  This package includes the draft policy statements for alternatives A, B, and C as they appeared in the Bluebook. Your policy decision today takes place against a backdrop of a gradual but fairly steady improvement in financial conditions and in the economic outlook.  As David noted yesterday, the staffs forecast for economic growth in the fourth quarter has been revised up noticeably. And the staff sees the rate of expansion picking up steam
     over the next couple of years, reaching 4 percent in 2011.  Moreover, as noted yesterday, some of you see the downside risks to the forecast as continuing to ebb, extending a trend evident in your most recent quarterly forecasts.  Nonetheless, 
resource slack seems likely to remain substantial for some time.  In the Greenbook forecast, that slack, together with stable inflation expectations, pushes inflation down to about 1 percent by the end of the forecast period.   With output seen as tracking well below its potential over the next few years and inflation projected to be edging further below the level that policymakers prefer over the intermediate term, the Committee might be dissatisfied with the outlook and 
believe that it could improve economic outcomes by providing additional policy 
stimulus.  The Committee might also see additional stimulus as warranted in order to guard against the lingering risk that spending, output, and employment could fall well short of the baseline outlookfor example, because financial market conditions could relapse as a range of government support programs are withdrawn over the next few months.  Under alternative A, page 2 of the package, the Committee would provide additional stimulus by boosting its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities from the currently planned amount of $1.25 trillion to $1.5 trillion.  In order to accomplish the increase in purchases without putting undue strain on the MBS 
market, the Committee would extend the time frame for these transactions through the end of the second quarter. Planned purchases of agency debt securities would stay at $175 billion. The Committee would also leave its target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 0 to  percent.  But it would alter its forward guidance 
slightly to indicate that it anticipated that economic conditions would warrant this exceptionally low range for the federal funds ratethat is, 0 to  percentfor an 
extended period of time, thus underscoring the low for long message.  Market participants appear to see little likelihood of an increase in asset purchases, and thus staff estimates suggest that a $250 billion increase in MBS purchases might lower longer-term rates by 10 to 25 basis points and, through that channel, reduce the unemployment rate two years ahead by a tenth or two of a percentage point relative to the rate that would otherwise prevail.   If the Committee instead believes that, in current circumstances, additional monetary policy stimulus would not be helpful on balance, it might prefer to adopt the policy actions and language of alternative B, page 3.  For example, even though the outlook for real activity and employment may be unsatisfactory, policymakers might also believe they cannot take for granted that inflation expectations are tightly moored and worry that expanding asset purchases further could push inflation expectations upward. Also, despite significant strides in developing reserve 
management tools, the Committee still might be unsure about their likely effectiveness.  If so, the Committee might think that the risks entailed in a further increase of asset purchases and the associated expansion of the balance sheet and reserves could outweigh the potential benefits. Under alternative B, the Committee would leave unchanged at this meeting the amounts and timing of its large-scale asset purchases as well as its target range for the 
  federal funds rate. The first paragraph of the announcement would set the stage for this decision by again noting that economic activity is picking up and by adding that the deterioration in labor markets is abating.  In view of the continued advance in equity prices over the intermeeting period and further declines in various private 
borrowing rates, the paragraph would note that financial markets have become more supportive of economic growth.  The inflation paragraph would continue to mention that the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued for some time.  And the third paragraph would again indicate that the Committee continues to anticipate that 
economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. The most significant change relative to the November statement would be the inclusion of the last paragraph.  In September and November, your statements noted 
that the Federal Reserve will continue to employ a wide range of tools to promote 
economic recovery and price stability.  That followed your indications, expressed since last December, that the Federal Reserve would be using all available tools.  With the LSAPs scheduled to wind down over the next few months, usage of many of the liquidity facilities dwindling or already at zero, and authorizations for many of the facilities currently extending only through February 1 and apparently likely to expire at that time, the Committee will soon need to make some adjustment to the wide range sentence. Under alternative B, that sentence would be dropped today, and the Committee and the Board would indicate their anticipation that most of the Federal Reserves liquidity facilities will expire on February 1.  This statement would reference the June announcement that indicated that should the recent improvements in market conditions continue, the Board and the FOMC currently anticipate that a number of these facilities may not need to be extended beyond February 1.  The paragraph would indicate specifically that the AMLF, the CPFF, the PDCF, and the TSLF were likely to be closed on February 1.  It would also note that the Federal Reserve would be working with its foreign central bank counterparties to wind down the temporary liquidity swap arrangements by February 1.  It would further indicate that the Federal Reserve expected to scale back amounts provided under the TAF, and it would indicate that the anticipated expiration dates for the TALF remain unchanged. Importantly, the final sentence would note that the Federal Reserve is prepared to modify these plans if necessary to support financial stability and economic growth. Market participants generally appear to expect that todays statement will encompass relatively few changes from Novembers, more or less along the lines of the first three paragraphs of this alternative.  The inclusion of the fourth paragraph would probably come as a modest surprise, and, if anything, it might suggest a 
slightly greater inclination to initiate policy firming than market participants expect.  However, given that most market participants appear to expect the facilities to close on February 1, given the retention of the key extended period language, and given the maintenance of the existing LSAP amounts, it seems unlikely that the fourth 
        paragraph would cause the statement to prompt any significant market reaction on net. Another option, perhaps, would be to separate the fourth paragraph from the Committees monetary policy statement and publish it on a standalone basis sometime in the next few days.  Indeed, over the past two years, the Federal Reserve has generally issued announcements related to liquidity facilities separately from FOMC statements.  However, that practice was driven importantly by the timing of decisions on liquidity facilities, which did not necessarily align with FOMC meetings.  It was also driven by the need to coordinate statements with foreign central banks, which generally made it impossible to release these announcements along with the FOMCs policy statement.  In the current situation, we understand that foreign central banks do not feel the need to coordinate with a statement referencing the likely termination of the swap lines on February 1, so there would seem to be little need for 
delay on that score. Perhaps also arguing for inclusion in todays statement is the point that, if the paragraph were to be released separately sometime in the next few days, the announcement today would still need to be modified somehow to foreshadow that possibility and so not blindside market participants.  That modification obviously would be noticed and suggest that something was afoot. The Committee could also couple this paragraph with alternative C, page 4.  Under this alternative, the Committee would begin to reduce the degree of monetary policy stimulus at this meeting.  The Committee might be motivated to take this action now if it did not anticipate that economic slack would be providing much restraint on inflation and was concerned that a large amount of stimulus is in train and risks eventually driving inflation upward, perhaps in part because of an effect on inflation expectations of the very large and growing Federal Reserve balance sheet.  In providing the background for this action, the first paragraph of the statement for alternative C would generally be similar to that for alternative B, but it would not cite the list of factors restraining household spending or the continued cutback in business fixed investment.  The second paragraph would note the Committees expectation that inflation will remain at levels consistent with price stability, but it would base that expectation primarily on appropriate monetary policy adjustments rather than the 
substantial resource slack that is cited as an important factor under alternative B.  The Committee would retain for now its target range of 0 to  percent for the federal funds rate, but it would indicate an expectation that economic conditions are likely to warrant low levels, rather than exceptionally low levels, of the federal funds rate for some time, rather than for an extended period.  Moreover, in view of continued improvements in financial markets and the economic outlook, the Committee would 
indicate that it decided to cap its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities at $1.1 trillion and its purchases of agency debt at $160 billion. Of course, market participants do not appear to anticipate a statement along the lines of alternative C. Even without the final paragraph, the adjustment of the forward guidance and the reduction in asset purchases would come as a considerable surprise to market participants and would suggest that the Committee was preparing 
   to begin to firm its policy stance relatively soon.  As Brian Sack noted yesterday, a Desk survey indicated that most primary dealers believe that the Committee will remove the extended period reference at least three meetings before commencing tightening. So quite possibly market participants might see a shift to an expectation that rates would remain low only for some time as suggesting that the Committee 
might begin to raise its target for the funds rate in the spring, say, at the March meeting.  Interest rates would likely jump markedly in response to this information, prompting an increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and a drop in equity prices. The inclusion of the fourth paragraph on closing the facilities would amplify the message that the Federal Reserve was now moving quickly toward a significant tightening of policy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Brian? [No response.] Okay. If there are no questions, lets begin our go-round with President Yellen. MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B, but I would like to emphasize something that Ive said in the past.  I continue to see a persuasive case for further policy easing. We are far below maximum sustainable employment, inflation is undesirably low, and almost any version of the Taylor Rule, as well as the Bluebooks optimal policy simulation, recommends a negative setting for the federal funds rate at the present time.  We need to remind ourselves of this fact to counteract the very natural instinct to tighten policy as the economy recovers. Its true that, if we had been free to lower the federal funds rate into negative territory, it would probably be appropriate to start tightening in the not-too-distant future.  But we were constrained on the way down by the zero bound, and, in the face of that bound, systematic policy calls for us to hold the federal funds rate near zero for a long time to come. Alternative B includes a paragraph addressing our special liquidity facilities.  I do not consider the proposed language very controversial, with one exception.  Im concerned about phasing out TALF support for newly issued CMBS.  I think its too soon to announce the termination of that support.  Outside of CRE lending, financial conditions have improved 
considerably, and its appropriate to allow the other facilities to expire as scheduled.  The reaction should be minimal because few observers expect them to continue. In contrast, our decisions relating to the LSAP programs are important from a policy perspective. The question of whether or not to reinvest SOMA holdings as they mature is an aspect of a broader policy decision concerning these programs.  I do see some advantage to allowing our agency-related holdings to run off.  This is a mechanistic strategy, but it creates a self-liquidating feature for our MBS portfolioan exit strategy that shrinks our holdings over time in a manner that will be predictable to markets, minimizing the possibility of abrupt movements in yields that could result from further discretionary asset purchases or sales and ongoing market speculation about our plans. Im encouraged by the staff assessment that allowing our MBS holdings to run off is likely to raise mortgage rates by only a few basis points.  If so, I think the benefits of increased predictability and a well-defined exit strategy will likely outweigh the small, albeit undesirable, contractionary effects of permitting our MBS holdings to contract before we would ideally withdraw stimulus. My bigger concern is that we just dont know what will happen to MBS spreads and mortgage rates as we wind down our purchases over the next several months.  Many market participants expect rates to spike up considerably.  And if that happens when the economy is still very weak, and the housing markets remain fragile, I think we may need to resume purchases.  I agree with President Bullard that its important to preserve the flexibility to tailor LSAP purchases and sales to emerging economic and financial conditions. The final line in paragraph 3 states that our purchases are conditional on evolving conditions, and I consider that line to be more than mere boilerplate.  We will need to take that proviso seriously during the next few 
meetings as we gain a better idea of how winding down our programs is affecting spreads and yields. In the meantime, its worth strategizing about whether there is any way for us to gear the pace of purchases or sales to evolving conditions without targeting a specific mortgage rate and without creating undue uncertainty and excess volatility in the markets. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B. The Greenbook assumes no change in interest rates through 2010.  That is consistent with my own view of appropriate monetary policy and is consistent with communicating that we expect to maintain very low rates for an extended period of time.  If outcomes are similar to the Greenbook forecast, removing the extended period language is a topic best left for the second half of 2010.   Removal of that language is likely to set off a significant change in market interest rates.  It will not be appropriate until private sector growth is on a sustainable path and labor markets have improved significantly. In terms of exit strategy, selling a portion of our holdings of mortgage-backed securities should not be done in 2010 if the economy unfolds as envisioned in the Greenbook forecast.  
Uncertainty about the amount and speed of sales of our very large holdings of mortgage-backed securities would almost surely drive up the risk premium required by private purchasers of mortgage-backed securities. Conversations with a variety of market participants in Boston indicate that such sales are not anticipated and would be viewed as a signal that we wanted 
mortgage rates much higher, with the potential to dramatically slow a housing sector just beginning to recover. Should the economy unfold as in the Greenbook forecast, with only gradual improvement in unemployment and the inflation rate well below 2 percent, I do not believe that we will need 
  to raise rates either through increasing the interest rate on reserves or removing reserves from the system until at least the end of next year.  The risks to real side recovery remain significant, and the costs of the downside risks outweigh the costs associated with any upside risks. Id like to follow up on the discussion yesterday on the primary credit rate.  If we were to keep the extended period language and raise the primary credit rate in January, it may send a confusing signal to the market.  While we would likely want to raise the primary credit rate as we implement the term deposit facility, I would prefer to raise the primary credit rate closer to the time we are implementing the facility and possibly in conjunction with removing the extended period language, which I would hope would not be at the January meeting. I also concur with President Yellens comment on the TALF.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Given the increasing signs that the economy is gaining momentum, I think its important for this Committee to consider language that begins to prepare the market for the possibility that we will need to begin reducing the degree of policy accommodation and our interventions in private markets sooner rather than later. The time to change policy is not now, but I do believe the time is getting closer.  I think 
the language in alternative C does a better job of this than the language in B, with the change in the forward guidance regarding the path of the funds rate substituting some time for an extended period of time.  I also note that paragraph 3 in alternative C begins with the phrase at this meeting.  I wasnt quite sure about the intent of that, but my interpretation isand I have some sympathy with the viewthat this language does emphasize that things may change at some future meeting, and it sort of keeps our options open that changes can come to pass. 
   My own view is that, as economic growth picks up and becomes more sustainable, real interest rates will rise.  Appetite for risk will increase, and that will lead to a rise in the opportunity cost of the vast amount of excess reserves that sits in the system.  The money multiplier will go up, and those excess reserves will flow rapidly out into the economy, as the opportunity cost gets higher and higher for banks to hold onto them.  The combination of more sustained growth and a flow of excess reserves into the economy would mean that if we want to retain control over those excess reserves, we will have to raise the policy rate.  So as real growth picks up and becomes more sustainable, our policy rates should rise with that.  Put another way, we may lose control of all those excess reserves. As Ive discussed at earlier meetings, I favor the inflation paragraph in alternative C primarily because it emphasizes the dependence of inflation on the stability of longer-term expectations and on policy adjustments that we will take to keep inflation levels consistent with 
price stability, both on the positive and negative side of our target. I like conveying this idea that it is monetary policy actions rather than structural features of the economy that influence inflation over the longer term.  Moreover, I think that the language of paragraph 2 in alternative C will help stabilize and anchor expectations, as it more strongly signals our commitment to maintain price stability.  I think this can only help us in a period when the dispersion in inflation forecasts has widened and uncertainty has increased.  As I said at our last meeting, the dispersion of the forecasts for long-term inflation, both in our SPF survey and our Livingston survey, has widened noticeably, and this should concern us. I favor including the last paragraph of alternative B, which is repeated in alternative C, regarding the expiration of some of our facilities on February 1 for three reasons.  First, and most importantly, I believe it is the right policy.  The improvement of financial conditions over the 
  past year has been swifter than some of us might have expected, and financial conditions appear to be returning to normalcy.  I see no compelling reason at this point to keep the facilities open beyond February. Second, the market expects that these facilities are going to be wound down early next year, so I dont think the paragraph would cause much of a market reaction, and it should help reduce uncertainty around that expectation.  Third, its becoming progressively harder to justify the existence of some of these liquidity programs as financial market conditions improve.  I assume that the Governors are going to have to take a decision soon about whether exigent and unusual circumstances continue to exist to justify the programs.  In my view, its becoming harder and harder to do that.  My only comment is that its not clear why we shouldnt further reduce the size of TAF auctions at this point.  Theyre still significantly undersubscribed, and we havent been able to increase the rate. There will likely be interactions with the term deposit facility, as we mentioned yesterday.  I suggest we reduce these auctions again to see if we cant get supply more in line with demand. As to our discussion yesterday about increasing the penalty rate, the discount rate, Ill repeat my plea on this.  Im sympathetic with President Rosengren and repeat my plea that we not treat our exit tools in isolation.  We need to treat them collectively and have a discussion in January about how all the pieces of our exit tools fit together, with an eye toward what form of monetary policy framework well want to use after this exit strategy is over.  That is, we need to know not only where were going, but also how all of these different tools fit together to get us there, because there are a lot of interactions.  Its difficult to determine the appropriate exit strategy and optimal size of our balance sheet without knowing which alternative monetary policy implementation framework were headed towards and what our policy rate strategies will be. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In our November statement, we committed to maintaining a target range of zero to 25 basis points for the fed funds rate as long as the economy continued to exhibit low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations. I believe that those conditions are still in place, and so I am happy to maintain the fed funds rate in that target range. Also, for the reasons ably described by President Plosser, I support committing ourselves to plans for ending the liquidity facilities as is done in both alternatives B and C.  I do not see the utility of our buying the extra $150 billion of agency MBS and $15 billion of agency debt in alternative B, but I am willing to support the thrust of the alternative, because our language in the November statement about the LSAP signaled a strong commitment to those extra asset purchases. With that said, I am concerned that alternative B is so silent about our plans for the balance sheet beyond March. I would recommend changing the last sentence of alternative B to read, The Committee will continue to evaluate the size and composition of its holdings of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets, so thats basically changing from purchases to holdings.  This change would communicate to the public that we may choose to reduce the balance sheet by failing to reinvest or by selling assets. My own view is that we should begin such a reduction in the second quarter of 2010, at least by failing to reinvest and, more desirably, through additional sales. Why do I favor reducing the balance sheet?  Well, first, the benefits of our interventions in these markets have fallen greatly.  I am convinced from evidence offered by the New York Fed that the LSAP had big benefits in late 2008 and early 2009, but during that period financial 
 markets were functioning poorly.  Risk premia in particular markets became largely disconnected from one another.  But as pages 12 and 13 of the Bluebook emphasize, these conditions have greatly ameliorated, and investors can more readily substitute across various financial assets.  In these circumstances, reducing our positions will have a muted effect on yields. The benefits, therefore, of our big balance sheet have been greatly reduced, and our big balance sheet is not without cost.  It confronts us with the low probability possibility of high inflation. Banks have $1 trillion of excess reserves.  These reserves represent an inflation risk 
generated from potential changes in household expectations. The logic here is simple.  If households believe that the price level is about to rise, they will demand more liquid deposits in order to make their transactions.  One of the five memos for 
the inflation dynamics session were going to get is by Simon Potter and other coauthors, and it indicates how increases in government debt can lead to exactly those kinds of changes in household beliefs. Given those changes, banks can readily accommodate the extra demand for deposits because theyre holding so many excess reserves.  The extra deposits in the hands of households become extra money chasing the same amount of goods, which has the possibility of generating inflation. In this way excess reserves are a vehicle for households expectations about inflation to become reality. One way this chain of events could take place is for banks to make additional loans.  However, their doing so would mean that they would be significantly changing the risk composition of their portfolios.  My own belief is that deposit creation would be fueled instead by households and firms selling banks relatively illiquid but relatively riskless securities like corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and Treasuries.  Households and firms now own about $4 trillion in such securities, which is enough to expand demand deposits by 600 percent.  This 
      expansion, obviously an extreme case, would put enormous pressure on the price level.  Id be the first to say that this inflationary chain is only a possibility, and I agree with market assessments that it currently has a low probability of occurring.  But one lesson I have taken away from the past five years is that our conduct of policy should take account of exactly these kinds of low-probability adverse tail events. The staff is currently exploring the use of reverse repos and term deposits.  These facilities have potentially useful ways to accommodate transient reductions of excess reserves.  In contrast, asset sales are a more effective commitment to a permanent reduction in our balance sheet. This difference means that, at a minimum, asset sales are a useful complement to term deposits or reverse repos. As I say, I would like to see shrinkage in our balance sheet beginning in the second quarter of 2010, but now I think its worthwhile for us to start to foreshadow that possibility by changing the language of alternative B as I have recommended to refer to holdings of securities as opposed to simply talking about purchases.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. MR. FISHER. Well, Mr. Chairman, on page 156 of the 177 pages of the last transcript, I said, My one suggestion, which I dont think will carry the table, is that we change the term extended period to for some time.  Mr. Chairman, my one suggestion, which I dont think will carry the table, is that if we do change the term extended period, we change it to for some time.  Im going to be a broken record on that, but I know it will not carry the table. Heres the point.  Im against expanding the balance sheet.  I take the comments just made by my predecessor commentator quite seriously.  But I do believe that the language in alternative B is acceptable even without changing for an extended period. 
 I would note President Rosengrens excellent point that we consider the treatment of the spread on primary credit and its juxtaposition against the extended period language.  I actually was caught quite flat-footed by that discussion yesterdayunprepared for it.  Id like some time to think about commenting on it.  Id like to see where it is sequenced into our exit strategy.  I understand the theoretical desire to re-widen that spread.  I do worry about the signal its going to send, by the way, to small and community bankers.  I dont quite understand the full 
composition of who accesses primary credit, and I could see some interpreting it as:  Youre 
still biased towards the big guys who are more active in the fed funds market and penalizing smaller borrowers who may want to access the primary credit window.  So Id like more time, and Im a little bit concerned that were rushing that discussion, particularly in the context of these broader things we have been talking about.  So I would ask very much that we not rush this into the first week of January. To sum up:  against expansion of the balance sheet, remain concerned about the phrase extended period, because I think weve boxed ourselves in therewe didnt get much for it, but its there. The third paragraph is very good. We did what we said we were going to do when it was necessary to do it, and were done.  We aim to complete these liquidity facilities and, indeed, we signaled that were on that road for asset purchases unless, as President Yellen points out, it becomes necessary, which I think we cover in the very last sentence, to modify our plans in order to preserve financial stability and economic growth. I have one other editorial suggestion in the first paragraph whether we use alternative B or C. We talk about the housing sector.  We talk about household spending.  We talk about business still cutting back on fixed investment.  And yet, in your excellent summary of what we 
 said, we have one point that is not included in there, which is the reluctance of businesses to expand overhead, including payrolls. My editorial suggestion would be at the end of the sentence that begins with businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace; they continue to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales, but remain reluctant to expand overhead, including payrolls.  I would insert that in either B or C. It is nowhere else referenced in this statement, and I think its a very important point. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Say it again, please. MR. FISHER. Yes, sir. With the sentence that reads, Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace; they continue to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales.  I would add, but remain reluctant to expand overhead, including payrolls. This is what we heard at the table.  You summarized it eloquently. It is not in the statement, and I think it should be.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Remain reluctant to expand overhead, including payrolls. MR. FISHER. But remain reluctant to expand overhead, comma, including payrolls. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  On the first two paragraphs, I thought they nicely captured the slightly better outlook that we heard around the table, but without changing the fundamental contours of the expansion that most of us expect.  So I thought they were in pretty good shape. On President Fishers suggestion, I think I would amend your suggestion in the following way.  I think this would be okayit would be interesting to hear what other people think.  Businesses are still cutting back on fixed 
  investment, though at a slower pace, and they remain reluctant to add to payrolls.  I think this reference to overhead is a little confusing. MR. FISHER. Well, payrolls are a big part of overhead.  So that would bebut I think we need to include that point. MR. KOHN. Then they continue to make progress.  I think we did hear that around the table, and its not inconsistent with the notion that the deterioration of labor market is abating.  So I think that would be all right. On the third paragraph, I agree with an awful lot of what President Yellen said.  I think were still in an unsatisfactory place, with the outlook for income, employment, and inflation still suboptimal for the next several years, even with a negative real federal funds rate in place.  If we had a positive nominal federal funds rate, Id probably be arguing for some easing, but we dont.  I think theres uncertainty about the benefits of adding to our longer-term purchases and some costs to that as well, so Im not prepared to argue for that.  So Im fine with leaving that as we have it. But I do think its important, as President Kocherlakota said, that were looking at low rates of resource utilization for some time, subdued inflation trendswe just had some confirmation of that this morningand stable inflation expectations. So I feel very strongly that we need to retain the extended period language. With every improvement in the economy and with the passage of time, we get closer to the eventual time when well have to tighten policy, but I think thats still some time away.  I worry that the natural real rate could be very low for some time.  The story were telling is one in which we have these headwinds, as youve been saying, Mr. Chairman, in bank credit, and as they go away, things kind of snap back and the policy rate can be normalized by historic standards under those circumstances. 
My concern is that we came into this episode with not a very high real interest rate, which seemed consistent with the economy producing at right around full employment and not much inflation pressure outside the commodity and petroleum sector.  We have to replace a bunch of consumption.  So presumably consumption as a proportion of GDP is going to be lower going forward, financial services as a proportion of GDP are going to be lower going forward, and residential construction as a proportion of GDP is going to be lower going forward.  This is a much more balanced economy.  But we need to crowd in investment and net exports to replace 
all that, especially because I dont think any of us want to crowd in government to replace all of that on a permanent basis.  Thats not a sustainable situation.  So I think the issue of when to begin normalization of the real federal funds rate and what thats going to look like is one in which I see a potential for a lot of softness for a long time to come.  And I think its too early, President Kocherlakota, to change the purchases to holdings.  Lets consider that as part of the late January meeting when we discuss the exit strategy. On the last paragraph, I am in favor of including itthe funding markets have returned to normal in most areas, short-term markets and banks are able to access funds without our help, with people issuing commercial paper or accessing funding without our help.  Its not an entirely riskless thing to suspend these. We dont know to what extent our being there as a backstop is providing the confidence to keep these markets going, and all of this funding has occurred in the context of very reduced demands for funding.  Banks and corporations are shrinking their balance sheets. When that turns around, its not clear whats going to happen.  So its not riskless, but its worth taking the risk.  I think we need to do that and wind up these facilities and see what happens. 
   Securitization markets are a more difficult picture, I think, especially for the new issue CMBS, as President Yellen pointed out. Its still a troubled market.  Theres very little activity. I did hear some mildly encouraging things from Brian Sack yesterday.  Its beginning to come back. Still, I think we could stick with the current wording, but, as President Yellen noted, we should take that last sentence seriously. If we get into the spring and the new issue CMBS market is still broken, we could think about extending that, I think, and evaluate the situation then. I think its a good idea to include this paragraph in the announcement.  This is a collaborative effort between the Board and the FOMC.  I think as long as the extended period 
language is still here, people wont take it as an early exit signal but rather appropriately as a signal that we see the financial markets are working better and we dont need the unusual liquidity backups. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B, but with one change. I would agree with President Plosser that the inflation paragraph from alternative C is 
the more appropriate one.  The inflation paragraph in alternative C says the following:  term inflation expectations have been stable, and the Committee expects that, with appropriate monetary policy adjustments, inflation will remain at levels consistent with price stability.  I 
think thats a better statement of what were up to here at the FOMC.  It takes ownership of the inflation outcomes, which I think is appropriate for the Committee, and I also think that statement does not preclude any factors that might influence inflation.  We look at many things.  We look at all the indicators that we can, both in the U.S. and globally, and the factors that might influence inflation.  But it does claim responsibility that at the end of the day its up to us to maintain low and stable inflation. 
  Future statements may have to reconsider what were saying about the federal funds rate.  I think this is an issue that we need to think about.  Is the federal funds rate really the primary interest rate instrument going forward?  I thought Brian Sacks report highlighted issues about federal funds rate control in the environment in the next few years, maybe longer.  It seems to me that might have implications for credibility and communication for the Committee, and so I think we need to think about that issue.  In particular, is the interest rate on reserves being viewed as the primary policy rate going forward, and is that sensible, and does that work in our models? The next meeting will be an important one for thinking about how to play the asset purchase program going forward.  We can discuss it in more detail at that time, but, as I said yesterday, I would prefer that we think carefully about how to actively manage the return of the balance sheet both to normal levels, as one concern, and to an appropriate mix of assets as another concern. With the very large size, were going to have to do that over a period of years, so we need a strategy about how were going to get there so that we dont have to make adjustments in any sudden fashion. Again, as we all agree, I think interest rates may remain near zero according to the Greenbook over the next two years. The Committee needs a clear plan for how to react to incoming data during that period.  Otherwise, whats going to happen is that, at the end of the first quarter?  Were going to be perceived as going on hold and perhaps staying on hold for a long time, but information is going to roll in about the performance of the economy.  We may want to adjust policy during that period, especially if the news is particularly strong or particularly weak, which can easily happen, according to the estimates of uncertainty around our forecast. 
 Our asset purchase program has been considered successful, according to staff analysis.  We could use that program to adjust policy going forward, as we remain at the near-zero policy rate. I would see the asset purchase program as a substitute for the policy easing we would have undertaken had we been able to do so.  It seems logical to me that we would gradually withdraw some of the policy accommodation coming from the asset-purchase program as the economy 
improves.  That would substitute for tightening that we would not be willing to do with the rise in rates. Also, we should stand ready to do more with the asset-purchase program should information on the economy come in weaker than expected.  Again, as many have pointed out, theres plenty of downside risk as well as upside risk.  I think the former Chairman of this Committee said that uncertainty isnt just a fact of life, its a defining feature of how we have to deal with policy. I agree with President Kocherlakotas suggestion on holdings in the third paragraph.  I thought that was a good suggestion. I support that. I also support President Fishers suggestion in paragraph 1, perhaps as modified by Governor Kohn, but I thought that was a good point, too.  And I agree with the comments that have been made about the final paragraph.  I support the final paragraph as written. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Its an interesting meeting.  The way Im trying to think of the context is that economic circumstances obviously have changed.  You and others have described them.  You might think of this meeting as an inflection point, where were beginning to think a little bit differently about how were doing monetary policy and how we might do it in the future.  There are a couple of aspects to it.  In this meeting, were beginning to describe, I guess, more definitely our exit from the extraordinary facilities that weve engaged in.  
  Paragraph 4 walks us through that, and I think thats a good thing.  And I also would probably be in agreement as we move to January for the increase in the spread.  With that, I do agree with President Plosser that we should also increase the minimum acceptable bid rate on the TAF as we go forward to keep that in line.  So that is, kind of, phase 1 of this.   Phase 2 is the more difficult, and thats the process of removing the highly accommodative policy and perhaps firming policy as we go forward.  That, of course, will 
depend, as many have said, on a variety of economic circumstances.  But thats always the case. Im very sensitive to the fact that unemployment will be very slow to come down over the next several quarters, but I also would remind the Committee that if we started today, it would be a 
long time before monetary policy is brought back up to what most would consider a normal 
policy under normal circumstances as well.  Were going to have an accommodative policy for many quarters ahead, even if we were to start removing some of it today, and we shouldnt lose sight that.  We need to be thinking about removing this accommodative policy and restoring our balance sheet, as others have said, to pre-crisis levels. We need to do that in gingerly way, of course, but we also need to begin to prepare the markets for that. Im very concerned.  I know how we need to be walking on eggshells, I really do.  But Im very concerned about this extended period language when were near zero, because it also provides a safe harbor for those who are going to engage, and are, in fact, engaged, in speculative activities around that, and we encourage that, and I think there is a price to pay at the other end of this. So as I balance this out, Im not inclined to wordsmith things, but I do have a slight preference for C for a couple of reasons.  I think it does more forcefully respond to the fact that conditions have improved.  It does allow us to scale back some of the purchases that, in my opinion, should be scaled back, and it does change the language from extended period to 
 some time.  I think, yes, there would be some jitteriness in the market, perhaps, but, at the same time, it would set the stage for giving people some confidence that things are improving and that we are, in fact, anticipating and avoiding some of the mistakes of the past that we are duly being reminded of.  So thats how I view it at this time.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. I think its premature to reduce stimulus, and I support retaining the extended period language.  My soundings of participants in the financial markets suggest that, whether we like it or not, this extended period language has become a fixation, and it gives us little flexibility until we really are genuinely ready to signal that we are going to tighten the policy rate.  So I dont see the benefits at this stage of coming off that language. I also support the inclusion of the language in the final paragraph.  I think this language is a useful reaffirmation of our intent, and I see the inclusion of paragraph 4 as furthering a communications practice of clarifying various exit questions related to management of the balance sheet. Having said that, if I understood President Yellens suggestion, I am sympathetic to the removal of the TALF sentence, if that was her suggestion, because I see the commercial real estate problem going forward as possibly requiring continuing use of TALF in support of the CMBS market. Perhaps it does not require comment, but I will say I am comfortable with the Desks recommendation of an interim policy pending further deliberation starting next month of not reinvesting proceeds of maturing MBS and agency securities.  I also agree with the recommendation to wait on the decision regarding the Treasurys portfolio.  Im comfortable with that because, given the small amount of maturities in the near term, I think these interim 
arrangements will have little effect on the markets interpretation of our policy direction. I think its worth commenting on that because were planning next month to discuss the overall exit policy. I see in January and possibly in subsequent meetings that the Committee is going to have to take up a number of questions that are quite complex regarding exit implementationwhen to begin active shrinking of the balance sheet, what tools to use, and what proportion and what sequence or what combination, and how much tactical adjustment is required in response to developments in the financial markets and the economy.  These are going to be very challenging questions, because there are so many policy variables at play and possible economic states that we will be dealing with.  So I would have been proposing something like the Chairmans suggestion. Let me just say that I welcome the January session, and I hope we devote a significant period of time to it. Like President Fisher, I was a bit taken by surprise or flatfooted by the recommendation on the primary credit rate, and I too would like to hear more discussion on that, and I think President Rosengren also commented that he had doubts regarding the timing of this, and I share those doubts as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some attraction for alternative C.  I dont think we need to provide further stimulus over the next couple of months by buying more MBS. If we had committed a couple of months ago to buying the amount listed in alternative C, I dont think we would decide to increase that amount to match up with alternative B. I think that President Kocherlakota was very eloquent about the concerns about our balance sheet, especially our strategy past March.  I think Mr. Sacks graphs showing the 
option-adjusted spread on MBS is stunning. It shows that we have driven MBS spreads well below historic norms.  And I think its worth keeping in mind that those historic norms already 
reflected an implicit subsidy due to the perceived status of the government sponsored enterprises as benefiting from a government guarantee.  President Kocherlakota pointed to the value of our asset purchases last fall and earlier this year in improving market function, and the natural metric 
for that is spreads. These spreads have not only restored market functioning, if you take them as a serious indicator, but we have gone beyond that, and were subsidizing the housing market 
now. I think we should look at our MBS strategy in terms of the composition of aggregate demand that we want to foster.  Do we want to tilt aggregate demand towards housing and away from other components?  I understand the need to stabilize the housing market, and we did that earlier this year. The market was in freefall.  Prices were falling.  That was cutting household net worth. People were cutting back on consumption.  They did not know where things were going. But the market is broadly stabilized now.  Prices have pretty much stabilized at the national level, though there is local price movement.  Granted, there is a huge foreclosure overhang, but the market is working through those foreclosures, working through those 
workouts, transferring those assets to productive hands.  I dont see the need to drive MBS down further, and I dont think as a long-run matter we want to be skewing demand towards housing construction. Its an easy fix for a weak economy.  Its easy to get those construction teams out there putting foundations in and putting up frames, but if we havent built too much housing 
now, I am not sure when in our history we ever have.  Having said all of that, I do believe I can bring myself to support alternative B on the grounds that we already have made a commitment to 
 purchase the full allotment at the next two meetings, and perhaps not enough has changed since that decision two months ago. One thing I like very much about alternatives B and C is the new final paragraph announcing the winding down of our presence.  I think it will be interpreted as an all clear siren, a signal of our view that the financial market crisis is more or less over and the conditions are no longer unusual and exigent.  I think thats a good signal to send.  I think it will contribute to a little more confidence at the margin in the recovery. I believe we should let mortgage-backed securities roll off as they mature.  I think that the primary credit rate is worth thinking about and studying, but again, like President Fisher, I was caught unawares by that issue and would like to go back and put some numbers down on paper about potential slopes of the yield curve and in the primary credit rate and think about what it means for the term deposit facility and our overall configuration.  President Plosser mentioned this as well. The TALF sentenceId like to see it remain the way it is.  I still havent seen evidence that the CMBS market is remedially fixable. Quantities are low, but it sure looks like fundamentals are troubled there. Holdings I think would be a useful change.  I support President Kocherlakotas suggestion that we reword our reference to our assets in terms of holdings. I also support President Bullards suggestion to move paragraph 2 of alternative C into paragraph 2 of alternative B, although if we dont do that after todays discussion of inflation dynamics and output gaps, we might want to think about replacing the phrase substantial resource slack, with low marginal cost.  [Laughter]  But we can debate that later.  That concludes my remarks. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im sorry.  Im a little confused about what President Kocherlakota said. Would you repeat your suggestion about holdings? MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, sure. The last sentence of paragraph 3, alternative BI want it to read, The Committee will continue to evaluate the size and composition of its holdings of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions of financial markets. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. A number of people have commented that they were flatfooted by the primary credit rate proposal.  That was the warning to give you plenty of time to think about that in the context of all the other things we are looking at. MR. LACKER. Well, this is our last meeting before the Board of Directors meeting at which you want to suggest that we execute. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will discuss. MR. HOENIG. Just one. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will discuss. MR. HOENIG. Just need one to execute. 
MR. LACKER. I know. 
MR. HOENIG. So you dont have to. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Wed like to have an input. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Having a recommendation available in case the Committee decides at the next meeting to take a step does not mean that we have to take a step. MR. LACKER. I understand that. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But I hear your concern.  President Evans. 
 MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  I think the continued monetary policy accommodation is appropriate.  The unemployment rate is at 10 percent, and core inflation is below my guideline of 2 percent. I agree with the economic markers that are listed in the paragraph on inflationthe rates will remain low for an extended period of time due to low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, and I do put substantial weight on all three of those. I was fascinated to hear Governor Kohns discussion of real rates and how the natural real rate might be low for some period of time.  That did stand in contrast to President Plossers discussion about how policy really might need to chase the real rate up.  As Don discussed, theres a need to replace consumption expenditures and other types of investment, and I believe that, inherent in Charlies commentary, he did not have that same type of need.  Really, this is just resource slack finding its way into a real rate discussion.  I think it bodes well for us to have a robust discussion of these issues and recognize that it finds its way into a number of different market indicators.  I tend to side a little bit more with Governor Kohn on this for that reason. Although the unemployment rate is 10 percent and is expected to improve only slowly thats the bad sideI still believe that a funds rate at about zero plus our large balance sheet is about as much as we can do and as much as we should do.  I heard Presidents Yellens very good point about how we need to be patientif wed instead been able to adjust policy in a more accommodative fashion, then wed be able to rebound a little bit more quickly, but because we 
cant do that, this is a reminder that we need to be patient in this attitude. I agree with that. I do think that the first-order effect of our large-scale asset purchases last spring was a nonlinear change in confidence that changed the tone for the way the economy was going.  I 
 think its probably very hard to come up with meaningful stimulative effects out of that, but at any rate, I do believe that we will need to recalibrate policy in a number of ways in 2010. I support the winding down of our lending facilities, as stated in alternative B.  I support generally redeeming the MBS and agency debt as they mature as a very light way to head towards getting our balance sheet in the right direction.  I dont think that that will be a move thats too accelerated towards restrictive policy.  And I support the continued preparations that you have described in thinking about our exit strategy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before beginning to shift the current stance on monetary policy, I would like to see the economy on a more solid footing.  Therefore, I support alternative B. I am clearly in a minority.  In fact, I think I am the only person so far that was going to raise concerns about adding paragraph 4 to the alternative B language.  I agree with the assessment that conditions in financial markets have been normalizing, and I see great value in informing the public after this meeting about the termination of our special liquidity facilities, but I am concerned that adding this paragraph to our statement today might imply that we are beginning to tighten the stance of policy.  So I was going to suggest that we avoid any confusion at this point and issue a separate statement.  But releasing two distinct statements doesnt seem practical, and no one else has suggested it. One suggestion I had was to add a word like separately in the beginning of paragraph 4, so it would read something like, Separately, in light of the ongoing improvements in the functioning of financial markets, et cetera. But that said, the only other comment I wanted to make is that, just like many others, I concur with President Rosengrens comments around making changes to the primary credit rate.  
 It would be helpful to have more discussion about that at our next meeting.  And if we do make a change, then coupling it with the introduction of the term deposit facility or other exit strategy communications would be preferable.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Four quick points.  First, I support alternative B with the Fisher-Kohn amendment about the reluctance by businesses to add head count.  While Im sympathetic to the views President Lacker described on the incremental net benefits of our MBS purchases, which I have discussed for some time, weve now said that we were going to do it, and theres nothing that weve learned between the last meeting and this meeting that would cause me to say that now is the right time to say, Just kidding.  So I think we should live up to what we said, because it would be, I think, a confusing retrenchment to go back to a smaller purchase level, even though, as a first impression many months ago, I would have been 
sympathetic to that view. Second, I support ending the existing liquidity facilities, and I guess Im of the view that we shouldnt relegate that to a separate statement.  We should make it a virtue.  We put these facilities in place. They did all that we expected them to do and probably more.  Theyve served their purpose. It is time for them to move on, and I think we shouldnt be sheepish about that.  I take that last line as seriously, I think, as President Yellen does.  When we say that were prepared to modify, I dont think thats boilerplate at all.  I think that says were still very attentive to whats going on. So, with respect to TALF or any other facilities, we need to be more aggressive as the financial conditions and economic conditions warrant.  I think were prepared to do so, but I dont think we should shy away from that.   
Third, on the question about the language around the purchases of securities, Id like to make two points on what President Kocherlakota said.  First, I just like saying that, Kocherlakota.  [Laughter] By next meeting I will be able to say the whole name without.  So thats my first highly value-added point on the suggestion.  My second is that I think we should think about how to describe this mix of redemptions and purchases.  Im not sure this is the right moment, but I think he does spark a pretty interesting thought.  And just one other word for consideration if we take this discussion up in January, rather than choosing purchases or holdings, I wonder whether portfolio is better. Portfolio takes into account that mix of what you might be adding and what you might be subtractingit has an allocation point associated with it. So I dont know the perfect words, but I think its an interesting discussion. And finally, I support Brian Sacks recommendation on the runoff of MBS as an interim solution. I think it might be an interim solution that, at least in my eyes, lasts for more than this intermeeting period, but at least for now, I think thats a prudent idea.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  I am worried that the backup in mortgage rates as the purchases wind down could be on the high side of projections, primarily because Im concerned about who might emerge as the substitute buyer.  The Treasury programs and the GSEs are approaching the point where they need to reduce their portfolio holdings.  My conversations with bankers indicate that theyre completely unwilling to purchase mortgage-backed securities without knowing exactly whats going to happen with our purchases and with potential sales. So considering President KocherlakotasI can say it, too suggestion in that light, I think we should talk a little bit about what we might do on sales and the 
  composition of the portfolio.  But I wonder if changing it without any further clarity on that might not cause even more concern over purchasing MBS. Second, even if we find ourselves in a position where wed like to provide more stimulus, its not clear to me that the last couple hundred billion reserves have really made an awful lot of difference. At the same time, if we resume purchasing the mortgage-backed securities, it would make it even easier politically to push resolution of the GSEs even further into the future.  And I firmly believe that the emergence of the GSEs from conservatorship, just as many of the larger financial institutions are coming out of government assistance, and determining what future they might have are going to be prerequisites for the restart of private mortgage markets.  I dont see how housing markets return to normal without the full spectrum of housing finance. Third, the role of TALF in CMBSit seems to me that, with the newly issued CMBS, the first new deal that came to market was so conservatively underwritten and had so much investor protection in order to be able to qualify for TALF that that was the very reason that it attracted the investor interest that it did.  And I would hope that that process would actually be able to continue through the next six months, and Im uncertain that we could do more past June.  So Im not as worried about that one ending in June.  And I fervently wish we had been able to 
do the same thing for residential mortgage-backed securities.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the nature of this discussion so far has confirmed what I suspected coming into this meeting, which is that were right on the cusp of starting to make hard decisions. Were not quite there yet, but everybody is positioning 
themselves.  And in that spirit, I want to position myself.  [Laughter]  While supporting 
alternative B, I want to draw a distinction between the substance of what I think we are doing 
 with the actions indicated in paragraphs 3 and 4 of alternative B and the way in which were communicating it. I have no problem with the first; I do have some concerns with the second.   With respect to substance, I think what we are saying in paragraph 4 is that we had a series of very special programs that were addressing blockages in credit markets that were instituted over the last year or so.  The unusual blockages and the large dysfunctionality in credit markets has substantially, though not totally, abated.  And under these circumstances we are winding down most, and eventually all, of these programs.  Second, I think were saying that were wrapping up the large-scale asset purchases that we announced in March.  Third, were continuing, obviously, the zero interest rate policy.  And, fourth, we havent made any decisions on exit as of yet. So Im fine with all of those. On the language, I think paragraph 1 captures well the consensus around the table with the Richard-Don amendment, which I think would be very useful.  Let me jump to paragraph 4, 
because I think paragraph 4 does have the potential to surprise markets.  I dont think the actions themselves will surprise marketsI think this is whats anticipated.  But the fact of including it in this statement, as Sandy suggested a few minutes ago, may be a surprise and will begin to, or could begin to, elicit a lot of speculation as to whether this is, in fact, the beginning of a staged, already planned exit. As all of you know, the amount of speculation among market actors as to what the exit plan is, with dates and quantities, is very high right now.  So the last sentence, as Kevin and others have suggested, ought to be taken seriously by us, and not be considered as boilerplate. I have to say, on the merits Im quite comfortable with the winding down as anticipated, with the possible exception of CMBS. That brings me to paragraph 3.  When Brian Madigan sent around the language last week, I looked at it and, for the reasons I have already indicated, I was a little uncomfortable, but I felt 
 that it was okay. I thought that the last sentence of paragraph 3 was on the verge of being anachronistic, but wasnt quite there, so that it could await the January meeting.  Brian Sacks informative and admirably forthright briefing yesterday injected some doubt into my mind about that, because of the anticipated runoff issue. Again, its not that the anticipated runoff seemed ill-advised as a substantive matter, but I do have some concern about whats being communicated by allowing those runoffs to happen.  Will there now be a firm view in the markets that we are just going to let these things run off, notwithstanding what may happen in the future? If theres a fair chance that that will be the inference drawn, then we would be faced, if conditions deteriorate in the future, with a decision that would be regarded as a significant change in policy, a switching on and off of the lights as it were, rather than turning the dimmer switch a little bit in one direction or another.  For that reason, I was actually somewhat attracted by Narayanas suggestion MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thats another beautiful name.  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO. Even though, obviously, our policy inclinations are probably different, I took Narayanas suggestion to be a kind of general statement of the Bullard doctrine, which Jim patiently repeats every six or seven weeks in this room[laughter]about the need for flexibility depending on circumstances.  I think that, while I could live with waiting one more month or six or seven weeks, to change that last sentence of paragraph 3, I have to confess to some uneasiness as to what were projecting to markets in staying with this sentence, given the way I think that paragraph 4 and the slight changes of wording in paragraph 3 will be understood. One final pointto Jeffs point on MBSI have two reactions to that.  One, for reasons many people stated in the go-round yesterday, mortgage rates and residential housing could still 
 be key to the path of recovery next year, and thus may be important to affect or to observe the effects of one way or the other. But, secondly, in the absence of conventional monetary policy easing possibilities, because of the zero bound, we found in March we had two choices.  We had the agency MBS, basically, and then we had Treasuries.  And Treasuries raise a whole different set of concerns about the possible interaction with fiscal policy and maybe even foreign exchange policy that I think a lot of people around the table wanted to avoid.  So I think its not just about the mortgage credit markets, even though to some degree it is about mortgage credit markets. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Im very happy to see that were going to have the discussion on sequencing in January.  I think its going to be very, very important to see if we can reach a consensus view on strategy and tactics.  The market is definitely wondering what those strategy and tactics are going to be.  Until then, I think it would be useful not to debate this too much in the press, because I think that just creates confusion.  I notice that in the primary dealer survey, the communications score we got this time came down a bit, and I think some of our discussion about asset sales versus no asset sales might have contributed to confusion on that front. Im not going to say where I stand right now on how to do the sequencing, but I do want people to start thinking about two broad issues.  One is the timing of asset sales, and on that, I think there are two major views:  one, starting with draining reserves and raising the short-term rate with asset sales held in abeyance, maybe used, maybe not; and, two, conducting asset sales first, and then moving on to raising short-term interest rates later.  I think thats a really important thing that were going to have to sort out.  The second broad issue is the sequencing of 
  reserve-draining operations versus the increase in the IOER rate.  The market thinks that were going to drain a lot of reserves first and then raise the IOER rate, but we may decide to do the reverse. So I think we need to have a thorough discussion about that issue. In terms of the statement, I favor alternative B.  Im with pretty much everyone else.  Were withdrawing quite a bit of accommodation, frankly, as we taper off the asset-purchase programs and phase out most of the liquidity facilities over the next few months.  We dont really know how important liquidity facilities are in terms of their backstop function, so until we actually take them away, were not really going to know exactly how much accommodation is being withdrawn. I think the extended period language still works.  I thought it was interesting that the primary dealer poll suggested that, if you keep it in, then its going to be at least three more meetings before the Fed might tighten.  Obviously, its actually four, because you would take it out potentially at the next meeting, and then there would be three more meetings after that.  So that fits pretty well with the informal poll that I talked about at the last meeting, where extended period, in my view, was at least six months.  So Im glad to see that the dealers are on the same page on that as I am. As far as President Kocherlakotas suggestion on holdings, Im uncomfortable with that.  Heres the reason why: I understand what youre driving at, that there is this question of redemptions.  But holdings suggests a two-sidedness that purchases does not.  I think if you put holdings in there, youre inadvertently going to raise the question of whether asset sales are now on the table in a much more assumed way than what we might want to imply there.  So I think thats the problem with it.  I understand the motivation, but purchases is one-sided, holdings is not. 
 Finally, on the new issue of CMBS, I know thats a decision for the Board.  I think that in the relatively near future the Board does need to clarify with the market, though, whether thats going to be extended or not extended.  Theres a pretty long runway for people to develop that and bring it to market, so I would say by late January or early February it would be useful to clarify whether thats going to go away or whether that is going to be extended beyond June 30.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  As usual, it was a very informative and diverse discussion. Lets talk a bit very broadly. Were going to come back in January and talk a lot about tactics. Let me just address for a moment this broad question:  Is policy too easy or too tight at this juncture?  You know, there is a fairly substantial view out therePaul Krugman and Joe Gagnon, for example, have expressed itthat by the Taylor Rule we are still several hundred basis points too tight, that we should, therefore, be doing a lot more asset purchases.  President Yellen, I think, was alluding to that.  So I think there is a respectable view which says that we should be looking to ease further rather than to be tightening.  The reason I personally, at least, am not convinced that thats the right way to go is that the connection between what actions we can take at this point and effective easing in the markets is not at all clear.  For example, on the one hand, mortgage rates are already extraordinarily lowits not clear that we can lower them 
much more.  And there are certainly risks associated with substantial further expansion of asset purchases, including destabilizing inflation expectations, causing commodity prices to rise, or causing the dollar to start to fall, all of which could lead to a reaction which would be actually a net negative. So while I see merit in the idea that we should, in some sense, be at an easier 
   stance than we are, I think we are, in fact, getting to the point where the connection between our tools and the state of the financial conditions is becoming much less clear. That being said, I have listened to President Bullard now for three or four meetings, and even I can begin to hear that after a while.  [Laughter] I think that we should not rule out additional purchases. We might want to consider a program of modest purchases, which could be varied, and consider doing that in a way thats responsive to broad conditions and, specifically, to something that well learn a lot more about in the next few months, namely, what happens to the mortgage rate and the housing market after our purchases end.  So I think thats something we want to keep in mind as we think about our broad strategy. Should we do less, as an alternative? I think its good for confidence and good for predictability for us to begin to normalize policy, to begin to operate in a way that people are more familiar with.  We are coming to the point where we can do that, and I view this closing of some of these facilities as being an important step.  I dont think that actually tightening policy is a good idea, for the reasons I just said. I think that the economy is still quite weak and that we should not, at this point, either tighten or strongly signal a tightening at this juncture.   The signaling is very important. For example, relative to President Lackers and others suggestion about cutting back slightly on our purchases, the $100 billion here and there is small change, as far the magnitudes are concerned.  President Plosser is holding his forehead.  [Laughter] Whats far more important in this context is the signaling.  What are we saying? Are we saying, therefore, that we have decided to begin a process of tightening?  I worry much more about the signals than I do about the actual purchases at this point, and so I think we have to be very, very careful. 
 I do think that what we are doing has been quite constructive.  Regarding these side risks of the dollar and excess speculation and so on, while we have to monitor those carefully, at the moment I think those things look, as best we can tell, to be all right.  And therefore, again, given the state of the economy, I dont think we should be actively signaling a tightening process at this point. I would notedespite the commentary of the dealers about three meetings and so onthat in the previous forward guidance episode we changed the statement about considerable period, and two meetings later we raised interest rates.  I mean, it was a meeting of intermediate language, and then the next meeting we raised rates.  So I dont think that were constrained to six months by any means. So my general preference is alternative B, with maintaining, importantly, the extended period language for the time being, trying to minimize changes that would be viewed as premature signals, either of tightening or ease, and thats a very important aspect of the language. But, at the same time, I think what we do want to signal is normalization as much as possible, that we are exiting from extraordinary facilities where we can, and that we hope that it will inspire confidence that we are moving towards more normal policy. Let me talk a little bit about some of the specifics that were raised in the language.  I think there is a good bit of support for President Fishers idea in paragraph 1 about staffing.  I didnt focus on it today, but, in fact, in last Novembers statement, the sentence Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, also said and staffing.  We cut that phrase for this meetings statement.  So it does seem appropriate to say that, even though were not seeing further declines in employment, were not seeing hiring either.  So, how does it go?  Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower place, but remain reluctant to expand payrolls. Is that what we have? 
MR. KOHN. And, I think you could say and. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And remain reluctant to expand.  Is that the right word was suggested? MR. KOHN. Add to payrolls. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Still cutting back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace, and remain reluctant to expand payroll.  Right? MR. FISHER. Don, you had the best words, I think. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What were your words, Don? MR. KOHN. I said add to payrolls. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Add to payrolls? 
MR. KOHN. Yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right, thats a little better.   On the inflation sentence, I think there should be a barrier to make changes.  I understand that several people have preferences for the language in C.  I think someplace where we might head at some point would be to combine those two.  For example, if we want to retain the reference to resource slackthis is just a suggestion for the future, Im not going to propose this right nowwe could say something like With substantial resource slack likely to continue to dampen cost pressures, and with longer-term inflation expectations stable,then the second part of the Cthe Committee expects that with appropriate monetary adjustments inflation will remain at levels consistent, 
and so on. So thats a direction we could consider.  Id note that one issue is that making that change today would constitute a change in our inflation forecast, and I dont think it really has 
changed from inflation being subdued to being consistent with price stability.  It seems that that would be a natural step to take when inflation risks and levels and forecasts seem closer to the 
  2 percent target. So my recommendation, based on less change is generally better, would be not to make that change today, but to recognize that going forward that reference to monetary policy actions and price stability would be perhaps a constructive direction. Regarding the third paragraph, I appreciate the thrust of President Kocherlakotas suggestion, and I think we do have to think aboutagain, as President Bullard has suggested how we might do additional purchases, and, if so, how we can do that in a way thats more responsive to incoming data.  That being said, I share the Vice Chairmans concern that switching to the word holdings at this point is going to be jumping the gun, in the sense of being too strongly suggestive that we can adjust the portfolio either up or down.  And we have not yet, I think, come to any kind of conclusion or agreement about how were going to deal with asset sales, that is, what priority or what order they would have.  So Im reluctant, for that reason, to do that. But, again, this, like Governor Warshs portfolio comment, is a suggestion, a direction, that were going to want to go toward as we have greater clarity among ourselves about how we want to manage our balance sheet. Several people objected to paragraph 4, but I thought the consensus mostly was to include thatagain, as a symbol of our exit.  The one question I would put before the group would be the sentence on the TALF.  We could simply drop that sentence, if there is interest in doing that. Brian, would that be a lacuna that would be troubling?  Were not referring to some of our other actions or programs. MR. MADIGAN. I think that presumably would be interpreted simply as the Federal Reserve has nothing new to report for the TALF. 
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, for those who are concerned that paragraph 4 is too strong a signal, or who are concerned specifically about CMBS, that might help in that direction.  President Evans.  MR. EVANS. Havent we already announced these dates tentatively? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We have announced them. MR. EVANS. I guess the question is the perception would be if you sort of ratify some dates but not the others is that a signal that CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Im just putting it forward for the groups consideration.  The difference is that the language here, anticipated expiration dates, is a somewhat different sense from the previous announcement, which was that its being extended to.  There is some information there in terms of the likelihood of a continuation of this program, but, personally, Im fine either way. MR. FISHER. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I think Janets point was that we not consider the last sentence boilerplate, that we are serious about it, and that we will adjust if needed.  Wasnt that your point? MR. LACKER. Actually, she was talking about paragraph 3. MS. YELLEN. Actually, I was talking about paragraph 3.  The same applies here.  Its just that the time for putting together these deals is so long that to wait until anything close to June to say the facility is still available is problematic. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We take the point that the Board needs to think about this very soon. And one can argue that this language does not preclude, obviously, extensionsit says anticipated expiration datethe last sentence says prepared to modify, and so on. MR. TARULLO. Richard suggests a parenthetical saying this is not boilerplate, this is 
    MR. FISHER. No, no, [laughter]. To be accurate, I would amend the last sentence to say, The Federal Reserve is preparedhonest to God, really, and we mean it[laughter]to modify these plans. I would not be in favor of taking that penultimate sentence out, Mr. Chairman. MR. PLOSSER. I think we should not take it out, because I think listing all the programs that weve done and omitting this one would be noticed, and it might be noticed in a significant wayI think thats what President Evans was saying.  So unless we really intend to do something different, I think it would be a mistake not to include it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. MR. LACKER. My sense is that it would be interpreted that something is  MR. PLOSSER. Somethings afoot, right. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Under President Fishers suggestion, well put the last sentence in bold. [Laughter]  Were noddingthis is worrisome here.  [Laughter] Is that acceptable? All right. My proposal, then, is to make the change about hiring in the first paragraph, and to make no additional changes to alternative B, noting for the future that we will want to 
consider modification of paragraph 3, the description of our portfolio, and that all of these things appropriately should be part of our discussion of strategy and tactics, which we have promised and we now have to deliver for January. President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. This may be too fine a point, but I have a thought about the use of the phrase adding to payrolls. In light of the increase of temporary workers, I am wondering if the business community thinks when they add temps, or they add contract workers, they are 
    adding to payrolls, when what were trying to say is theyre not adding permanent hires, which is the fine distinction. MR. FISHER. Thats why I used the word overhead originally, but I think its too fine a point. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, of course, in the November report, even including temporary hires it was still a negative number. MR. LOCKHART. Right. But we are getting anecdotal feedback that theres a sort of sequenceyou add hours, then you add temps, and then ultimately you add permanents.  And we are getting anecdotal feedback that there has been a pickup in temporaries.  I just raise it to make sure we are communicating what we want. MR. KOHN. I think it says remain reluctant, so isnt that what weve said?  Its not as if theyre not doing it, but theyre being very cautious about it, so I think its okay. MR. LOCKHART. Fair enough. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other comments? [No response.]  All right. Brian, are you prepared to read the changes? MR. MADIGAN. Theres just one change, Mr. Chairman.  My understanding is that were adding to the fourth sentence at the end of the first clause another clause, so after the words slower pace we add, comma, and remain reluctant to add to payrolls and then semicolon. There are no other changes to alternative B as it appears on page 3.  Also, the Committees vote will be covering the directive on page 8 of the handout. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. And we will have further discussion dealing with redemptions going forward.  On that issue, for example, in my July Wall Street Journal editorial about our exit strategy, I explicitly noted what the redemption expectations were for the next 
  couple of years. I noted that between $100 and $200 billion a year would roll off, and I included that as part of my description of how we would exit.  So it isnt an entire surprise in that respect.  If there are no other questions, were prepared to take a roll. MR. LUECKE. As Brian indicated, this vote will cover the directive on page 8 of the handout and the statement on page 3 with the modifications that Brian read. Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes 
Governor Duke  Yes President Evans  Yes Governor Kohn  Yes President Lacker  Yes President Lockhart  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes President Yellen   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Why dont we take a 15-minute coffee break and come back for the special presentation? [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me call on Jeff Fuhrer who will introduce the special  topic. Jeff. MR. FUHRER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In thinking about how to introduce this topic this morning I was tempted to extend the Titanic metaphor of yesterday afternoon. Were I to do that, I might note that First Officer Wilcox and Ensign Sheets had left the Committee in the middle of the frigid North Atlantic, clinging to flimsy 
life boats, while the sharks of high unemployment and highly uncertain inflation circled hungrily. Fortunately, the intrepid crew of the R.M.S. Carpathia, headed by officers Michael Dotsey from Philadelphia, Mark Wynne from Dallas, and Jeff Fuhrer from Boston, were steaming their way to extricate the Committee from its rather precarious circumstances.  However, I chose not to extend that metaphor.  
[Laughter] Further, in part, because, unlike Batman, who seems to have an endless supply of tools in his utility belt to take care of any circumstances that might arise in Gotham City, we dont actually have any such tools to extricate you from your predicament.  So, I will move on and leave that belabored metaphor alone. 
         In weighing the options for monetary policy in the coming years, inflation plays a pivotal role. If inflation stabilizes at its recent level and then rises gradually to the Committees implicit goal, while unemployment declines towards a rate consistent with full employment over the same horizon, many will consider this an acceptable outcome.  If, on the other hand, inflation continues to decline in the presence of elevated unemployment, falling more significantly below the Committees goal, then the Committees policy decisions could become much more complicated. Which of these outcomes materializes will depend on what determines inflation in the short run. So what does determine inflation?  In answering this question, I am reminded of one of my favorite stories, which involves Sigmund Freud and one of his graduate students (and which is probably entirely apocryphal).  The student was troubled about Freuds theory that all dreams reflect wish fulfillment.  She had a recurrent dream in which she murdered her young children, and she found it impossible to believe that this dream reflected her wishes.  When she posed this dilemma to Freud, he thought for a moment and replied, But dont you see that your 
dream simply reflects your wish to disprove my theories?  [Laughter] Like Freud, economists love to be clever, and also like Freud, our deep and abiding love of our own theories may make it difficult for us to see their flaws.  In considering the possible trajectory of inflation, I believe we should contemplate the alternatives with un-Freud-like humility.  The fact is that we dont know what will happen to inflation.  In recent years, inflation has certainly fluctuated, but it has been quite stable by the standards of the 1970s and 1980s.  It appears to have been so far 
only modestly responsive to the significant declines in employment, activity, and labor costs. And, while short-run inflation expectations have generally tracked short-run movements in inflation, some measures of long-run expectations have remained remarkably stable.  As a consequence, it is difficult to know whether inflation in this turbulent period will respond to economic conditions as it did in the turbulent 1970s and 1980s, or instead remain placid in the wake of recent and ongoing upheaval, 
taking on the imperturbable, sphinx-like demeanor that was characteristic of inflation in the period that we now fondly remember as The Great Moderation.  Our goal today, then, is not to provide evidence that irrefutably explains how inflation has behaved and where it must go, but instead to impose a degree of rigor on the discussion, to raise questions based on our best theoretical and empirical analysis, and, most importantly, to spark a discussion among the principals at this table that will help us better understand each of our imperfect frameworks for thinking about inflation. And in that regard, I would just note that, at breakfast this morning, such a discussion started to emergea rather engaging, interactive discussion about some of 
the issues that well talk about today.  So Im hoping that maybe some of that sense will spill over to the discussion this morning.  Now let me turn it over to Mike Dotsey, who will make the first presentation. 
                                                       4 The materials used by Mr. Dotsey are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). MR. DOTSEY.4  Thanks, Jeff.  Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, our presentation summarizes two important concepts: inflation persistence and output gaps. These seemingly disparate concepts are linked through the Phillips curve.  We  argue that interpretations  of inflation persistence and output gaps derived from  Phillips curve models are sensitive to assumptions made in estimating these models and assumptions made about the nature of shocks entering the models.  Unfortunately, there is not always a sound basis for choosing among candidate assumptions.  As a result, basing policy discussions on measures of persistence or 
output gaps may not be productive. Our work shows that: (1) observed inflation persistence may be the result of monetary policy choices and thus cannot be used to infer structural features of the economy; (2) statistical measures of output gaps are not useful in formulating monetary policy; and (3) theoretical measures of output gaps may in principle be helpful for guiding policy, but in practice they are probably not. Let me turn my attention to my first topic, inflation persistence.  To investigate the potential sources of inflation persistence, we used a simple sticky price model.  In this model, the New Keynesian Phillips curve accounts for deviations of inflation from average, or trend, inflation.  In looking at inflation over the last 50 years, it appears that inflation can be characterized as a process having a time-varying mean.  Thus, how one models trend inflation has important implications for the structure of the model.  If trend inflation is changing over time and is modeled as changing over 
time, then the New Keynesian Phillips curve needs to account only for the deviations of inflation from a changing trend, not for overall inflation.  Thus, a New Keynesian Phillips curve estimated on deviations from trend inflation will predict less backward-looking indexation or shock persistence.  There will be fewer structural rigidities than if the trend is depicted as a constant. To clarify the sources of inflation persistence, consider the reduced-form New Keynesian Phillips curve on page 3 of the handout.  This equation indicates that there are several potential sources of inflation persistence.  Inflation can be persistent because marginal cost is persistent, because markup shocks are persistent, because prices are indexed to past inflation, or because the inflation trend is itself persistent.  It seems natural to interpret a time-varying inflation trend as the result of a drifting inflation target.  We estimate our simple model for two specifications of the inflation trend, a specification with a fixed inflation target and a specification with an inflation target that follows a random walk.  We find that allowing for a random walk inflation target reduces the overall contribution of indexation and markup shocks to inflation persistence. Further, the random walk inflation target specification is statistically preferred to the constant target specification.   
      That finding implies that the persistence of inflation is, to a large degree, determined by policy.  Supporting this point is the observation that historically across countries inflation persistence depends on the monetary regime.  In particular, inflation persistence is lower in countries that are on a gold standard or where the central bank targets inflation. The finding that inflation persistence is largely determined by monetary policy and that other sources of persistence are not very important implies that policy is fully capable of changing the behavior of inflation without generating large economic costs, especially if inflation expectations are well anchored. Now let me turn to my second topic, the usefulness of output gaps for conducting monetary policy. We are going to conclude that they are not very useful.  Broadly speaking, output gaps refer to the deviation of output from a level deemed to be desirable. Thus, constructing an output gap requires one to take a stand on the desired level of output, often referred to as potential output.  There are two primary approaches to defining and measuring potential output:  those based on statistical procedures and those based on explicit theoretical models.  Statistical measures of potential output are constructed either as smoothed measures of actual output or smoothed estimates of output derived from a production function. A second approach to constructing potential output relies on estimated theoretical models, where the behaviors of output and potential output depend on the structure of the economy and the exogenous shocks buffeting the economy.  Some features of the economys structure and some of the shocks hitting the economy may give rise to inefficient outcomes.  For example, monopolistic price setting and nominal rigidities introduce distortions. In addition, markup shocks introduce inefficient fluctuations.  This suggests defining potential output as that output that could be obtained in the 
absence of distortions and inefficient shocks, but including the effects of shocks that are classified as efficient.  In simple versions of these models, a monetary policy that 
minimizes the difference between actual output and the model-based definition of potential output, that is, the model-based output gap, is welfare improving. Thus, in principle, model-based output gaps may be useful for policy purposes.  In contrast, the statistical measures of the output gap are less useful for policy purposes, because these measures need not be closely related to model-based gaps.  For 
example, in figure 1 of the handout we consider a productivity increase in an economy with sticky nominal prices.  With sticky prices, output responds more sluggishly than it would if prices were flexible.  Because of this, potential output rises by more than actual output, and the theoretical output gap is negative.  However, if we were to graph a statistical measure of potential, which is a smoothed version of actual output, it would rise by less than actual output, producing a positive output gap. Thus the model-based output gap and the statistical-based output gap would move in opposite directions and imply different monetary policy responses.  This example illustrates why we think it unwise to base policy on statistical-based gaps. 
          However, at this stage of model development, we are also uncomfortable with using model-based gaps for policy purposes.  First, in more complicated models, the output gap is no longer a sufficient statistic for evaluating the welfare implications of monetary policy. Moreover, the models are still preliminary.  In addition, shocks play an important quantitative role in these models, but the economic interpretation of many of these shocks is unclear. While we have come to accept productivity shocks as structural, we have not yet reached that comfort level with many of the new structural shocks coming out of New Keynesian Phillips curve models. It is also of importance that different models may produce very different measures of the output gap. In figure 2 we plot the output gaps from three representative models. The blue line represents the output gap from our small-scale model, the green line is the output gap from a medium-scale New Keynesian Phillips curve model developed by my colleague Keith Sill, and the two red lines represent alternative output gaps from the Boards larger-scale EDO model.  It is abundantly clear that the output gaps from these different models are very different.  We, therefore, are not confident that, given the current state of knowledge, one can rely on model-based gaps as sufficient indicators for monetary policy. On a more positive note, we believe that the process of formulating and estimating a particular model can be quite useful for policy purposes.  Estimation can inform a policymaker about the shocks that the model suggests are impacting the economy.  If the shocks have been correctly identified, the model can be a useful guide to policy. A general lesson from our models is that it is not enough to know that output is high or low relative to trend to conclude that output is high or low relative to potential; rather one needs to know something about the shocks hitting the economy and the assumed structure of the economy.  It seems more appropriate that policy discussions should proceed based on explicit discussion of these shocks, rather than the implied gaps. From this we conclude that the use of models in policy discussions is beneficial.  Also, because we have no agreed-upon model, it is useful to consider the implications 
from a number of models, and it is certainly not necessary that all the models be of the New Keynesian variety. It is only the careful consideration of a full range of imperfect models that enlightens and places discipline on policy discussions. In that regard, the Chicago exercise falls into the class of exercises that we find productive. They provide a detailed exposition of their model, the various variables constructed using their model, and the contribution of shocks to these constructs.  This is consistent with the way we suggest policy discussions be conducted.  We are, however, more skeptical of the specifics of their exercise.  They find that their measure of potential output, which conforms to our definition of potential, helps explain another model construct that they call fundamental inflation.  We dont think this is much of a surprise.  Fundamental inflation is the part of detrended 
                                                        5 The materials used by Mr. Wynne are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). inflation generated by efficient shocks in their model absent inefficiencies and is thus constructed similarly to the way they construct potential output.  That strategy increases the chance that those two constructs will be correlated.  However, this correlation is not necessarily useful for policy purposes.  In particular, fundamental inflation is only weakly correlated with actual inflation, implying that their model, like most models, doesnt provide a good structural explanation of inflation.  Therefore, from an academic perspective, their results are very interesting, but from a policy perspective less so, because knowing the Chicago measure of potential output 
tells us very little about actual inflation.  This is a key point of the Philadelphia-Richmond presentation.  And now Ill turn it over to Mark. MR. WYNNE.5 Thank you, Mike. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, in recent years, a number of monetary policymakers have addressed the question of whether greater global economic integration, or globalization, has had a significant impact on inflation in the United States.  One dimension of this integration is trade in goods and services, and, as figure 1 in your handout shows, imports as a share of GDP have gone from just over 4 percent during the 1950s and 1960s, to more than 18 percent at the most recent peak.  While there appears to be broad 
agreement on the importance of globalization as a real phenomenonthat is, as a phenomenon that affects the location and pattern of real economic activity, along with relative prices and real factor returnsthere is less agreement on what globalization means for inflation dynamics and monetary policy in a country as large as the United States. On the one hand, there are those who argue that the gap concept that is now relevant for thinking about U.S. inflation is a worldwide measure rather than a domestic one.  On the other hand, there are those who argue that, with a flexible exchange rate regime, the effect of foreign price developments on U.S. inflation is minimal.  Whether greater openness has implications for inflation over the medium  to longer term depends very much on how monetary policy responds to these 
developments.  Globalization does not alter the fact that, at longer horizons, inflation is ultimately determined by the actions of  monetary policymakers.  Our remarks this morning will focus on the so-called global slack hypothesis, the notion that, as a result of globalization, the concept of slack that is most relevant for thinking about short-run tradeoffs between inflation and real activity is global rather than local.  We argue that the global slack hypothesis has analytical content even under a floating exchange rate regime in the context of at least one widely used framework for thinking about inflation dynamics in open economies and, furthermore, is consistent with what we see in the data. The evidence is fragile, to be sure, but it suggests that the hypothesis cannot be dismissed outright. In an open economy, as can be seen in slide 5 of the handout, the final consumption basket will consist of both domestically produced and foreign produced goods, and consequently the overall rate of consumer price inflation will be a weighted average of the rates of increase of the prices of these goods.  When price 
      changes are infrequent and asynchronous, the rate of change of the prices of domestically produced goods can be written as a function of the expected future rate of change of these prices and the real marginal costs of producing them.  The rate of change of the prices of foreign produced goods sold in the domestic market can be written analogously. Substitution of these relationships into the domestic consumer price index then gives us a general expression for the open economy Phillips curve.  Domestic CPI inflation is related to expected future domestic CPI inflation and a weighted average of domestic and foreign real marginal costs.  By invoking additional assumptions 
about the labor markets and firms pricing behavior, it is possible to rewrite the Phillips curve in a more standard form in terms of domestic and foreign output gaps. And here we need to consider two cases: Suppose that firms that engage in international trade set prices in their own currency and adjust them infrequently. Under what is referred to as producer currency pricing, the law of one price holds and exchange rate pass-through is complete.  In this case, there is a relatively straightforward mapping from real marginal costs to output gaps that allows us to write the domestic Phillips curve in terms of an average of the domestic and foreign output gaps, as can be seen in slide 6 in the handout. The foreign output gap matters not only as a proxy for foreign marginal costs and their effects through import prices, but also because of its influence on domestic pricing decisions. In fact, theory suggests that domestic 
marginal costs (and, therefore, domestic producer prices) will in general depend on the foreign gap as well because: (a) domestic firms export their products abroad, so higher foreign demand will force them to pay higher domestic wages; and (b) 
variations in the terms of trade will affect their domestic market share and consequently their domestic costs.  Likewise, foreign marginal costs will depend on foreign as well as domestic output gaps. What if, instead, firms that are engaged in international trade set prices in the currency of the market to which they are exporting, which is arguably the case for 
most foreign firms selling in the United States?  Under what is referred to as local 
currency pricing, the law of one price no longer holds and exchange rate pass-through is incomplete.  However, we can still derive an expression for domestic CPI inflation in terms of domestic and foreign output gaps, but the Phillips curve now includes an additional expression reflecting the impact of deviations from the law of one price on inflation dynamics.  These deviations, in turn, can be tied to the easily observable real exchange rate (net of terms of trade effects). Under both assumptions about pricing behavior, the composite coefficients on the domestic and foreign output gaps are identical functions of the underlying structural parameters of the model.  Most importantly, as we show in our background paper, the coefficient on the domestic output gap declines as imported goods become more important in the consumption bundle, while the coefficient on the foreign output gap 
     increases; that is, as foreign goods become more important in the consumption bundle, the strength of the relationship between the foreign output gap and domestic inflation will increase, while the relationship between the domestic output gap and domestic inflation will become weaker. Turning now to slide 7, even prior to the recent flurry of work on globalization, a number of Federal Reserve economists had looked into the potential effect of foreign slack on U.S. inflation. These earlier analyses generally found that the estimated coefficients on measures of foreign slack were not statistically significant in traditional backward-looking Phillips curve regressions.  In these earlier studies, the 
rest of the world was usually assumed to be the rest of the G7.  Borio and Filardo revived the debate in a widely cited paper, and they found a statistically significant role for the foreign output gap in explaining U.S. inflation and a declining role for the domestic output gap.  Subsequent work by researchers at the Board of Governors, however, cast doubt on the robustness of these findings. The New Keynesian analytical framework that we use provides an account of inflation dynamics around a possibly time-varying steady state.  Hence, when looking for patterns in the data, it seems appropriate to focus on the cyclical components of the variables. If we define the world as consisting of just the G7 economies, as much of the older empirical literature had done, ordinary least squares estimates of simple open economy Phillips curve regressions suggest that there is a more significant relationship, in a statistical sense, between slack in the other economies of the G7 and the cyclical component of inflation in the U.S. than there is between 
slack in the U.S. and inflation in the U.S.  But while the G7 group still accounts for a significant share of world GDP and of U.S. imports, these shares are declining, as shown on slide 9 in your handout. A more comprehensive empirical evaluation of the hypothesis would look at a larger group of countries.  Slide 10 in the handout reports 
some of the results we obtain estimating simple versions of our Phillips curve specifications.  For three of the four specifications, the estimated coefficient on the foreign output gap is statistically significant at the 5 percent level and exceeds the 
estimated coefficient on the U.S. output gap in magnitude.  The evidence is far from 
overwhelming, to be sure, but it suggests that the idea is worth taking seriously and exploring further. There are a number of possible reasons for the fragility of the evidence, mostly having to do with the conceptual and measurement challenges associated with estimating Phillips curves in terms of domestic and foreign output gaps.  But we should note that it is possible to completely eliminate foreign slack variables from the Phillips curve.  That is, the effects of foreign slack on domestic inflation can be fully captured in principle by movements in a terms-of-trade gap.  Interestingly, when 
written this way it turns out that the slope of the Phillips curve with respect to domestic slack is exactly the same in the open economy and closed economy 
specifications of the model, as can be seen in slide 11 in the handout.  The equivalence between these two approaches to capturing the relationship between 
                                                         6 The materials used by Mr. Fuhrer are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). foreign slack and domestic inflation also means that much of the earlier empirical work on this issue, including our own, probably needs to be reconsidered. To sum up, there are sound analytical and empirical reasons for believing that globalizationand, in particular, the greater openness of the U.S. economy to trade has had important implications for inflation dynamics.  However, there are well-known conceptual and measurement issues associated with the use of output gaps.  A  terms-of-trade gap can, in principle, capture the effects of the foreign output gap on domestic inflation developments, but it remains to be seen how well a global slack perspective can improve our ability to forecast inflation and understand the tradeoffs that monetary policy faces.  Jeff will now continue with the staff presentation.  MR. FUHRER.6  Ill be referring to the third of the three exhibits in your packets.  I just wanted to note before starting that the work Ill discuss reflects contributions from other people in the room today, including Giovanni Olivei, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Todd Clark, as well as other economists who couldnt be with us today. In current discussions regarding the likely trajectory of inflation, two issues loom  large:  first, whether well-anchored expectations will help to restrain inflations decline and, on the flip side, whether an unanchoring of expectations could lead to an undesirably high rate of inflation; and second, whether and  to what extent output (or, more generally, resource utilization) gaps are useful components of empirical models of inflation, and, if they are, to what extent current gaps will counterbalance the effects of expectations on inflation. Page three of your handout provides a skeletal depiction of the most widely used framework for modeling inflation.  Some version of this model is in use at virtually 
all Reserve Banks and the Board; in fact, very little exists in the way of strongly competing frameworks.  As the top left panel of the chart shows, the framework suggests that inflation depends on the expectation of inflation in the next period, the 
current value of a driving variable such as marginal cost of production or an output gap, and the inherent inertia in inflation, captured by dependence on the previous periods inflation rate. Many other factors can influence inflation directly and indirectly, but these key elements sit at the center of the framework and of recent discussion. The extent to which each of these three factors contributes to the evolution of inflation remains under considerable debate. The top right panel of that chart highlights an implication of this simple framework.  If the framework is true in the current period, it holds in the next period as well. If you squint at these two panels for just a few minutes, and squint in just the right way, youll see that the model boiled down implies that inflation fundamentally depends on current and expected output or marginal cost, as noted in the bottom left  panel of the chart. Of course, expectations of output depend in part on expectations of monetary policy.  Policy in turn depends on the inflation goal, which in this framework may vary over time.  As a consequence, expectations of monetary policy 
          actions and the monetary authoritys inflation goal are, not surprisingly, among the determinants of inflation. The bottom right panel of that same exhibit displays the implications that this framework holds concerning which expectations measures should best explain inflation. Taken together, the simplest features of the model in the top left panel and its implications in the next two panels suggest that short-term inflation expectations matter directlyor, equivalently, that the expectations for output on average over the medium term matter directly.  Less directly, but certainly importantly for this audience, long-run inflation expectations should matter, to the extent that they serve as proxies for the central banks long-run inflation goal. What do anchored expectations mean in this framework? Your next exhibit, the fourth exhibit, suggests that anchored expectations should be interpreted as having two components.  First, the public knows the FOMCs numerical inflation goal, and second, the public believes that goal is not likely to changeat least, not by much.  As indicated in the exhibit, many believe that the Feds inflation goal has changed quite significantly in postwar history, particularly in the 1970s and 1980s.  More recent evidence suggests that public perceptions of the Feds goal have changed little in recent years. As shown in your next exhibit, exhibit 5, a carefully constructed econometric estimate of the inflation trendoften interpreted as the publics perception of the FOMCs inflation goalsuggests that it has indeed varied over time 
and that the variation is well proxied by the median SPF 10-year CPI inflation forecast, and that this proxy has been remarkably stable over the past 10 to 12 years.  If this proxy accurately reflects the relevant expectations, then they are currently well-anchored indeed. We now use a model that incorporates all these featureswell-anchored expectations, some effect of output gaps or marginal cost on inflation, and some effect of lagged inflationto quantify the extent to which, in circumstances such as those we face today, well-anchored expectations may serve to offset downward pressures on inflation from dramatic declines in marginal cost. Your next two exhibits consider such an exercise. In the first case, shown in exhibit 6, expectations are purely forward-looking.  The economy starts at a 2 percent inflation rate, thats the black line in the top panel, with marginal cost, shown in the bottom panel, well below its historical averageas is the case today for real unit labor costs for the nonfarm business sector, which are about 8 to 10 percent below their long-run average.  Somewhat optimistically, I assume that the output gap is only modestly negative.  In these circumstances, the inflation rate, which is shown by the solid black line, falls to a bit below 1 percent, and rises after two to three years to the Feds assumed inflation goal of 2 percent, which is depicted 
by the red line. In the second case, which is shown in your next exhibit, exhibit 7, inflation depends in roughly equal measure on lagged and expected inflation.  The other 
        features of the simulation are identical, but the results in this case are dramatically different. Inflation falls significantly below zero, and the funds rate, the dashed black line, is pinned at the zero lower bound for several quarters.  I should emphasize that the coefficient on marginal cost in these simulations is quite small by historical standards. The point is that one needs only a very small dependence on marginal cost to develop such results. Clearly, the implications for inflation in this canonical framework depend critically on the way expectations are formedpurely forward-looking or with some measure of backward-looking influence.  So which is a better description of inflation? Your next exhibit, number 8, outlines an empirical approach to answering this question. We estimate a model that allows expectations to be determined by any combination of the following measures: the rational or model-consistent expectations 
employed in the preceding simulations, lagged inflation, and short- and long-term survey expectations, here using the Survey of Professional Forecasters measures.  We allow the contributions of these four expectations proxies to vary over time. Your next exhibit, exhibit 9, presents a simple summary of the results.  On average over the past 30 years, the purely forward-looking expectations have played at most a modest role in explaining inflation, and that role appears to have declined in importance in recent years.  Lagged inflation has played a somewhat larger role historically, although its role has similarly declined in recent years.  Survey expectations have helped to explain inflation, and their influence appears to have risen in recent years. I would note that the survey measures are well-approximated by slow-moving averages of recent inflation, which suggests that they too may anchor inflation, as they will lend a slow-moving component to it.  While this might serve to slow the decline of inflation in the face of significant marginal cost pressure, it will also slow inflation during its ascent to the Feds inflation goal.  The bottom line of this exercise is that the data suggest that the very favorable outcome in the purely forward-looking exercise of exhibit 6 is not our best forecast. Your next several exhibits consider what would happen if the publics inflation expectations were to become unanchored. Note that the models that we used in the simulations just a moment ago require inflation ultimately to rise one-for-one with an increase in long-run inflation expectations.  Interestingly, estimates of a less structured empirical model, shown in exhibit 11, yield the same basic result.  A reasonable interpretation of that result is that when long-run expectations move 
significantly and persistently, they likely reflect a change in the publics perception of our inflation goal. Such a shift, if sustained, would very likely feed into inflation over time. Your next exhibit, number 12, considers a potential cause of such a shift in long-run expectations. Based on the same empirical model, the exhibit examines the response of long-run expectations to a decline in core inflation.  The figure suggests that, over the past 25 years, persistent deviations of core inflation from the Feds inflation goal have engendered significant movements in long-run expectations.  This 
     exhibit highlights the risk that, in the wake of declines in core inflation over the past year, long-run expectations could also decline.  Together with persistently large output gaps and cost pressures, declining long-run expectations could imply sizable declines in inflation. Of course, the risk could play out in the opposite direction if expectations moved persistently higher. Another candidate for spurring such an expectations dynamic is the potential link between inflation expectations and the expected path of federal deficits.  The New York Fed conducted a set of surveys to elicit perceptions among consumers and financial experts about the association between future changes in government debt and inflation. Survey responses shown in exhibit 13a indicate that a majority of consumers perceive unexpected increases in government debt to be inflationary, irrespective of whether unexpectedly high debt is due to a shortfall in tax revenues or higher-than-expected government spending. In a follow-up survey, the scenarios described in the exhibit were expanded by adding specific hypothetical causes for the increase in government spending and shortfall in tax revenues.  These additions had no effect on the response patterns. Moreover, they are robust across education, income, and financial literacy categories of consumers.  In contrast to consumers, financial experts view the scenario in which highthan-expected debt is due to a shortfall in tax revenueswhere a recession is the leading cause for such a scenarioas not inflationary, with 6 out of 11 financial experts associating such conditions with a decline in inflation.  However, 10 out of 11 financial experts perceive the scenario in which there is higher-than-expected government spending to be inflationary. Having discussed some ways in which expectations could become unanchored, we now attempt to quantify how unanchored expectations might affect our outlook for inflation. Exhibit 14 displays a simulation of the model we discussed earlier in exhibit 7, except in this case the public mistakenly believes the central banks inflation goal has risen to 3 percent. The upward pressure that this places on inflation, the black line, is noticeableinflation does not decline as deeply as in the 
simulation with anchored expectations.  The funds rate, the black dashed line, is pinned at the zero lower bound for a shorter time.  But the Feds actions and the course of inflation gradually persuade the public, in this model, at least, that the Feds goal is not 3 percent, so the economy returns to its desired state of full employment with price stability. Even with unanchored expectations as characterized in this exercise, very low costs and sizable slack at the onset of the simulation still imply a 
protracted period of low inflation. All of the Phillips curve models, structural or reduced-form, old-fashioned or new-fashioned, hinge on the influence of an activity or cost variable.  Without the influence of such a variable, these relationships are vacuous and inflation can be indeterminatethere is no channel for monetary policy to control inflation, and, as suggested in exhibit 3, the relevant expectations have nothing to anchor them.  Exhibits 15 and 16 examine the issue of whether activity gaps have been reliable 
         inflation predictors. Much ink has been spilled over this issue, so we are unlikely to provide a definitive answer there.  But our empirical work corroborates the commonsense findings of Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and that is that gaps matter when theyre large, but less noticeably when they are small.The figure in exhibit 16 summarizes the evidence simply, although it takes a second to orient yourself to it.  Using historical data from 1961 to 2009, the figure compares the absolute value of unemployment gaps on the vertical axis to the difference between forecast errors from a Phillips curve and a naive statistical model 
of inflation that does not include the activity gap.  The reduction in forecast error provided by incorporating an unemployment gap measure is insignificant when the 
unemployment gap is near zero, toward the bottom of the chart.  But, as the magnitude of the gap increases, the forecast error made by the gap-augmented model 
falls relative to the error from the naive model, as indicated by the prevalence of bluediamonds to the left of the vertical axis in the upper half of the chart.  This finding is consistent with the small estimated coefficients on output gaps in Phillips curves for 
the 1990s and early 2000s and explains the finding in some prior research that during those relatively calm times, the naive model predicts inflation about as well as, or better than, a gap-dependent forecasting model. This is less likely to be the case in current circumstances. What does this empirical finding imply for the current inflation forecast?  Your next exhibit, number 17, shows that a model that incorporates this nonlinearity explains the past several years inflation data quite well. However, the surge in unemployment over the past year implies a significant decline in inflation to near zero over the next year or so. Thus, the next several quarters will provide an important test of this model. Finally, we would be remiss if we altogether ignored money in a discussion of inflation dynamics. Your final exhibit, which is courtesy of the Minneapolis Fed, displays the correlations between money growth and inflation at progressively longer horizons from left to right. While these correlations do not show causality, many would agree that, over long periods of time, high growth in money is likely to be accompanied by high inflation.  Because such correlations are essentially
contemporaneous, they also do not imply that money can be used to predict future inflation. As the exhibit suggests, Milton Friedman may now rest in peace. That concludes our prepared remarks.  Wed be happy to take questions. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. First, let me thank the staff for an outstanding effort in putting this all together and, indeed, coordinating among different Reserve Banks.  We now have an opportunity for questions or comments.  Let me start with a question for you, Mike.  You talk 
  about statistical models of gaps, but I think they look to be mostly constructed from single- variable analysis, looking only at GDP.  Take your example with the productivity shockif you also looked at, say, productivity or unemployment and so on, you would get more information, and you might be able to identify the shock in that case.  So wouldnt a multivariable analysis reduce some of your concern about statistical models? MR. DOTSEY. I really cant answer that. I havent done that research, and I havent looked into that. I dont know if Andreas, whos also with me today, has anything he could add. MR. HORNSTEIN. The short answer, to be honest, is yes.  For this particular example, the way its structured, you rely on price rigidities.  So with a productivity increase, output is not going to move so much and employment contracts.  A particular example would predict that if you look at more information, you might reassess what you think about the gap.  On the other hand, the way these gaps are usually constructed, you generate the trend output pathyou dont use that kind of information. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman, if you take the model as a maintained assumption, it tells you how to calculate the gap, and you do use all those variables.  So when they talk about model- generated gaps, thats exactly what theyre talking about.  I think the difficulty arises, as their memo and the Chicago one illustrate, in that different models give you different estimates of the gap, and different estimates of how productivity shocks affect what you regard as CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I thought the point was if you look at just the path of GDP and you took a quadratic trend or something out of that and looked at residuals, the gaps you would construct that way would not be necessarily economically meaningful for reasons we understand. 
    MR. LACKER. In a statistical atheoretical model.  Right. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But if you believed in their model, then productivity and unemployment data would help you identify gaps in their modelwhich is not a bizarre model; its similar to a lot of others. Questions or comments? President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I was impressed with all of the papers. It was obvious that a lot of work went into them, and Im very appreciative of that. I wanted to talk about two messages I took away from the PhiladelphiaRichmond paper.  Its more commentary than questions.  One is the discussion that President Lacker and Chairman Bernanke were just having about the difference between old thinking and new thinking, or old Keynesian and New Keynesian models, about gaps.  I think this difference is that just looking at a statistical trend as a way to figure out what potential output is or efficient output is can be misleading.  Just to cite the current example, output right now is about 8 percent below trend as measured from December 2007.  The question is: How much of this fall is efficient?  How much of this represents a deviation from potential output?  The theme that comes out of the PhiladelphiaRichmond paperand its basically a theme of all work on monetary economics for the last 15 yearsis that theres really no way to answer this question without a model. The second message that comes out of this paper is that measuring an output gap can be hard. I think that, at times, the paper, or the presentation, seems to imply that this is somehow a new problem with New Keynesian modeling when, in fact, its pretty much an old problem, which is true in all economicswe can come up with observationally equivalent models that, in this case, will give rise to different measures of output gaps and then different implications of optimal policy.  I think the Chicago paper points this outthat this is not something special to 
the New Keynesian approach to thinking about monetary economics, but rather its something thats present in all macroeconomic models. In fact, I think the New Keynesian approach actually helps us with thinking about sorting across models because it brings so much more auxiliary information to bear compared to older approaches; for example, it requires consistency between household-level and firm-level expectations and observed data, and theres consistency between asset pricing and firm investment decisions.  All of these kinds of restrictions are valuable sources of information that make it easier to use data to distinguish among existing models.  The point is that I think the PhiladelphiaRichmond paper is right that these newer models dont fully solve this identification problemwhat are output gaps, whats the right thing to do at any given moment in time? I think there are two parts to trying to respond to this problem. One is that we use a wide range of models, and this is something you see in the Bluebookseveral models are considered.  We might even think of expanding that range of models.  And then theres supplementing that with good judgment, which is what the Chicago memo, I think, is trying to argue; that is, if we bring enough good judgment to bear, we can actually sort through some of these issues.  That can be very helpful. The second part, which is something thats more common in other parts of macroeconomics, is to use microdata as an auxiliary source of information beyond macrodata.  
The EDO model, which is used at the Board, is one step in this direction because it uses sector- level data, but there are lots of other kinds of microlevel data that can be very informative.  For example, theres this issue about whether or not inflation is backward-looking, that is, for example, whether, when firms set prices, they look backwards or not in terms of indexation.  
  Well, we have lots of microdata on price setting. Mark Bills at the University of Rochester and Pete Klenow at Stanford University have basically spent the last decade on this issue.  The ECB has commissioned studies in a wide range of countries to do this in Europe.  It would be great to supplement some of our thinking about just building aggregate-level models with information from microlevel data.  Likewise, a lot of times the questions hinge on these latent or unobservable things in the macro model which we could actually try to get information about from microlevel data, for example, questions about firm financing costs, questions about the marginal efficiency of investment.  There can be uses for microlevel data to try to supplement whats in the macro models. So by and large, I like the PhiladelphiaRichmond paper and presentation, but I think they came across as far too negative about the state of play.  I think that weve made enormous progress in the last ten years in bringing models to bear that are useful for policy analysis, while at the same time they embed the ingredients of modern macroeconomics that have been proven useful in other contexts. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. MR. EVANS. Theres not a long list of people already? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, youre next. 
MR. EVANS. All right.  Im a little reluctant to intervene so early because I have a series of rants that I could go on. [Laughter] And I apologize for that. Regarding your question, Mr. Chairman, I think you put your finger on one of the things that bothered me.  But, first off, I thought this was a terrific set of papers, and, theyre very helpful as we think about these issues.  I think the papers expose a number of Committee 
 members to a different type of discussion, one that economists tend to have, which you may or may not like, but, at any rate, this is what we do. I thought the PhiladelphiaRichmond critique of statistical gap measures and New Keynesian models was just a little too mechanical and didnt represent how we actually use these measures in this room.  They had the example of a beneficial productivity shock and a sticky-price model. If everybody followed that, their analysis says that, after a positive productivity shock well get a positive statistical output gap.  Well see that output goes up, but the trend is going to be smoother and so its positive, while, in fact, what is actually taking place is that potential is a lot higher and output only went up by this much.  So its a negative type of gap. And if all were looking at is the output gap, as Mike properly noted, were going to mechanically make a mistake. But the question is: Have we ever gone through this?  We have.  The Greenspan Fed lived through this during the second half of the 1990s.  The debate between irrational exuberance and a once-in-a-generation productivity acceleration was squarely put on the table in those discussions, and, in the end, the productivity argument carried the day, and policy did not erroneously tighten. How did we end up there?  Well, Chairman Greenspan and the Committee dismissed looking only at single measures.  Im sorry Dave Stockton isnt here, because that was very uncomfortable as Chairman Greenspan would say, Phillips curveno, no, no, we dont want to look at that. Capacity, no, no, no. And nobody could quite figure out exactly which 
resource slack measure he wanted to look at, but he was looking at resource slack.  He used other 
information beyond the comparison of actual output with a simple trend.  So if we think about the productivity shock example in the PhiladelphiaRichmond memo, in a sticky-price model, because output cannot expand to potential, labor input is going to fall.  This comes out of all the 
 model simulations.  Ellen McGrattan has papers where you see that from this type of shock.  So labor slack is negative. What about inflation signals?  A positive statistical gap relative to a linear trend would call for upward price pressure, so wed be worried about inflation picking up. But in fact, in the model, the true output gap is negative and theres downward pressure on inflation because marginal costs are lower.  So, indeed, in the second half of the 1990s, we saw a good deal of such downward cost factors. We were paying attention, and we did not get caught up in just this single output gap measure.  Fundamentally, we scratch our heads when we have different measures that dont line up.  Thats a real-time warning, and we try to reconcile these conflicting signals. We look at our models and our assumptions more closely.  Just think about how the Greenbook gives us a good view on structural productivityeach Greenbook, which is more 
often than we really need it because it doesnt change that muchbut still, thats quite good.  And then theres other anecdotal information.  Chairman Greenspan kept sayingand I know I didnt understand it when he first said itthat we heard plenty of business reports of higher 
productivity and earnings analysts five-year-ahead forecast smoothed were telling us something and that turned out to be right. So the bottom line is that we lived through an example thats like the most troubling example in the paper, and I think we passed it.  So that was pretty good. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I guess it was a productivity episode also in the jobless recovery after 2001 where we saw unemployment high relative to outputsomewhat similar. President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. Thank you. I just want to sketch out how I see these presentations related to past discussions weve had, as President Evans did.  Ive often sensed some intuitive hurdles to consensus here. At this end of the table, some participants have argued that you ought 
to think of the gap differently from the unemployment rate relative to 5 percent or so.  That intuitionthat the gap has to be really big right now with unemployment at 10 percent comes from this earlier way of thinking about macroeconomics that President Kocherlakota referred to.  We had macroeconomic models that were essentially static (the static part isnt important for this purpose), but they werent growth models, and they were grafted on a deterministic growth model, and the idea was that the deterministic growth model gave you a benchmark of what output and activity could be and what inflation could be, and then macroeconomics was about deviations from a deterministic growth model. We faced that, and there was this challenge of integrating the two.  We didnt know how, and we know how now. The way we integrate growth and fluctuations is the stochastic growth model, and that provides an internally consistent, coherent understanding of the determinants of 
growth and fluctuations. So we dont need to rely on this ad hoc marrying of two different, disparate models. When I think about gaps, I always want to start from scratch.  I want to say, All right, lets take a model and lets pretend you dont know what a gap is or you dont know how a gap is defined. Lets look at inflation dynamics.  Does the difference between output and some other counterfactual output appear in that equation?  And lets look at optimal policy, and does the difference between output and some other counterfactual output appear in optimal policy? When you do that in these stochastic growth models, what you get is the counterfactual with which you should compare output to figure out what inflation is going to do and what policy should be. Its something that responds to shocks.  Thats the basic lesson I get out of this class of models that Mike Dotsey was talking about, unlike the deterministic growth model 
where the benchmark counterfactual output everyone was thinking about is something that, 
because it comes from the deterministic growth model, does not respond to shocks; so you can estimate it easily with an exponential function of time into a smooth statistical trend. The thing to remember here is that its marginal cost, and its just this use of production functions to get to an output gap that gives us the ability to write these modern inflation dynamic models in terms of output gapshence my facetious suggestion to substitute real marginal cost for resource slack in the statement.  Another way to look at this intuition is to think about a 6 percent unemployment rate in January of 2010.  That seems preposterously unlikely.  It seems that it would be really hard for us to engineer policy coming out of this meeting to get that.  But if youre having trouble understanding an output gap or a potential that moves down a lot in a recession, think about why you dont think we could achieve a 6 percent unemployment rate in the first quarter. It would be really costly to employ all of those resources.  Its that the marginal cost is kind of high nowits not as low as you would think by just looking at the gap.  Thats the intuition, I think, for this other way of thinking about what counterfactual level of output or activity ought to be your reference in thinking about inflation dynamics. I want to say a word building on what President Kocherlakota observed about the use of models in policy. Dotsey et al. conclude that these models are not quite ready for use in policy, and Id qualify that. To paraphrase Churchill, theyre not quite ready for policy, except that all other models are less ready for policy than these models are.  I think its fair to say that this broad class of models is the only game in town now.  What most people have said is that further approximations to reality are all going to be extensions of, elaborations of, this broad class of models where there is price setting with price stickiness, and thats where the real nominal interaction comes from. 
 Within a model, you can answer these things really tightly.  So youve got to step back and look at a range of plausible models that, as President Kocherlakota points out, fit the data roughly equally well and decide what to do. If you dont look at models, youre still using a model, because youve got an implicit model in your head.  Its kind of like axiomatic choice theory, right?  Youre acting as if you have a model in your head if youre making a choice.  Being explicit about which models you understand and youre relying on seems obviously preferable to an approach where you dont formalize those things and dont tie down your insights or your intuition with the kind of internal coherence that President Kocherlakota described. Ill make a final point.  Except for the case of purely backward-looking inflation expectations, the models depict us as in an equilibrium in which we are following, have always followed, and will always continue to follow a fixed rule, a fixed mapping from economic 
circumstances to what we choose.  Maybe theres some drift in it over time, but thats the basic framework, so at all times youve got to look at a gap.  But, then, what does it tell you about policy?  What does it tell you about what its going to take to follow through on that rule in order to maintain the consistency of inflation expectations with what you would like to see maintained?  Thats a key question. Sometimes the gap doesnt say as much about that.  Sometimes I sense a large gap being adduced as evidence that we can pause for a long time, and its not obvious that thats the case.  Its not obvious that our policy rule doesnt build in a different response. So thats just my effort to tie this back to discussions weve had around this table. I compliment the authors.  I learned something from all three of them, and Im grateful for their efforts. 
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, the only thing that puzzles me in what you said is the implication that we dont use models.  We do use models. MR. LACKER. We do. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And alternative models.  The staff uses both large macro models that try to deal with aggregation and complexity, and they use smaller models.  I think, as you say, theres only one model in town.  I dont think you can write down a Keynesian model that doesnt have a role for gaps in it. MR. LACKER. I didnt mean to imply that you or the Board staff dont use models. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. 
MR. EVANS. Could I make a comment? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans has a two-hander. 
MR. EVANS. This is a line of commentary that I dont always follow, that the gap is somehow a special variable, an endogenous variable.  In the context of writing down an equilibrium model, you could writeIm pretty sure this is truethe equilibrium decision rules, which are a function of the relevant state variables, which could be transformed so that the output gap captures that part of it.  That would say that, given our policy response function parameters, this is how everything responds to the gap, and were following through on it.  So it requires art to know how we should be responding to those things, but its not prima facie wrong. MR. LACKER. Im not sure what youre saying. 
MR. EVANS. When we say the output gap looks like this and so I think that policy ought to respond in this fashion because disinflationary forces are going to change things a little bit, theres nothing in that that is in principle against the model, and were the central bank in the middle of that model. 
 MR. LACKER. Yes. MR. EVANS. Okay. Then I didnt understand your comment about when we talk about output gaps. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen. 
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want first to thank the authors and presenters for raising a host of important issues about inflation dynamics.  Uncertainty about the longer-run inflation outlook is quite high right now, and the extent of disagreement among forecasters is quite large.  Even so, as I read the papers I was asking myself if there were some morals here for current policy.  I identified three that emerged from the staff contributions and the broader literature, and I just wanted to take a minute to highlight what I thought the policy conclusions are. First, the papers and broader literature suggest a very strong theoretical rationale, and I see significant empirical evidence, for the view that the level of economic activity matters to inflation. The general principle that very low levels of economic activitywhether theyre measured by marginal costs as they are in the New Keynesian model, or by output gaps, capacity utilization, or unemploymentcause inflation to fall is a common thread across a broad set of macro models used for monetary policy analysis.  As Jeff Fuhrer noted, without some connection between real activity and inflation, these models just have no linkage between monetary policy and inflation. As Jeff noted, models with slack fit the inflation data reasonably well, and over the past year Phillips curve type models do a pretty good job of explaining the decline weve seen in core inflation. This is a point that I made and President Evans made as well a couple of meetings ago.  Going forward, with marginal costs obviously very depressed and considerable 
   slack in evidence by any measure, these models predict continuing downward pressure on inflation. A second clear policy takeaway from the literature and presentations is that, without question, inflation expectations are an important determinant of inflation.  And, as with slack, there is considerable uncertainty about how to measure those expectations and about what forecast horizon is relevant.  But in the current situation, a wide range of inflation expectations has been holding fairly steady, and I think the presentations suggest that well-anchored inflation expectations should help to counter the disinflationary pressures arising from very low levels of economic activity over the next couple of years.  This is something that makes me less worried that I otherwise would be about outright deflationary outcomes. The third policy conclusion to my mind is the one I want to emphasize the most.  There is obviously a great deal of uncertainty about the exact nature of the inflation process, and I 
conclude that thats something we have to take account of as we formulate monetary policy.  Theres a large literature on optimal monetary policy under uncertainty, and it lays out several key principles. The first is that there are relatively simple policies, and Taylor-type rules are a class of them, an excellent example.  These policies are robust in the sense that they work well across a range of different models and degrees of difficulty in measuring gaps, and there is a very large literature documenting this.  As we know, the policy choices of this Committee have come 
reasonably close to the predictions of some variant of the Taylor rule for the last several decades, and, as the Bluebook indicates, most variants of Taylor-type rules currently indicate, as I said before, that the funds rate should stay near zero for a long time. 
 A second principle of optimal policy under uncertainty is that policy should be formulated to guard against particularly undesirable outcomes, and this principle to my mind suggests we should stay at the zero bound for an extended period because we can easily raise rates, but its hard to lower them. A third principle is that policy responses to different economic indicators should depend on the quality of the signals they are sending about the state of the economy.  And in the current situation, the level of unemployment and the degree of slack in the labor market that we see is so enormously large by every measure that it is sending a strong signal now, and thats something that we should be responding to. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a question rather than a comment, and its for Mike. I had trouble understanding the paragraph or two that you had in your paper about the current situation. I guess you say we shouldnt be sitting around this table talking about gaps.  So what should we have been talking about this morning?  And within this model, how do you explain what has happened over the last two years?  Weve had an enormous drop in output and a significant decline in inflation. So how would you have designed this mornings discussion if you had had an opportunity? MR. DOTSEY. I dont know if I can tell you exactly whats going on in the economy today. Thats a little bit of a hard road to walk down.  But with regard to your first point, if I were sitting at this table, I would find the discussion among Charlie and Narayana and Jeff very productive. Charlie could have had his entire discussion without mentioning the word gap once. Basically he was talking about what kind of shocks he thinks are hitting the economy, given an underlying model based on, I guess, some of his own work and things like that.  What 
kind of impact would those shocks have on the economy, and then what should monetary policys actual response be?  That I find extremely valuable in my own thinking, and thats the way I think about policy. The gap construct is something that, as Charlie commented, is going to be model- specific. But I find that when people rely on that too much without doing the hard work, which people have done around here in this discussion, of talking about what are the beneficial models that help us understand things and the disagreements we might have over them in terms of identifying whats going on, then that can sometimes lead away from a productive discussion.  So I dont know what you talked about this morning, but if you MR. KOHN. So within the confines of the model, what happened over the last two years?  How did we get where we are, and what are the implications of that for policy? MR. DOTSEY. Its unfortunate for the New Keynesian models that at this point it seems that what we had was a large financial meltdown.  What we do not have yet, but which is part of the big research agenda thats just taking off, is a way to integrate the way we think about financial markets and their role in the economy.  So if I were trying to do things now, I might say Im going to go look at Bernanke and Gertler and Gilchrist or Im going to look at Kiyotake and Moore or maybe models like Diamond and Rajan and I might even pull away from the New Keynesian paradigm and try to understand what theyre telling us is going on in the economy, and then try to figure out a response. So I think theres no getting around it, as Jeff Lacker 
saysweve got to put our models on the table, see where they fit things, and then figure stuff out imperfectly.  And in that discussion, if you want to use gaps and you find them helpful, thats 
fine, and they may be a good communication device as well.  But I dont think theyre essential.  Theyre an artificially constructed device that you can just sort of think about or not. 
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-hander from President Kocherlakota. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. But the model is trying to account for all variability in the data, so its going to say something about the answer to Governor Kohns question about what has happened. What is the model going to say?  Some shock has taken place according to the model. What is the shock that has happened in the last two years, or what is the constellation of two or three shocks that have happened in the last two years? MR. DOTSEY. I would be no more informative on that than anybody here.  But one could say that one of the things that has happened in financial markets is that capital is not being allocated efficiently across the economy; that is, the firms that might be getting the capital in normal times, maybe smaller productive firms, are not getting it, and some
productive firms, perhaps because they have better balance sheets or have been around, are getting it, and that would look like a technology shock. But, then again, maybe were in a world where we have ambiguity aversion in our model, and all of a sudden people have become very, very uncertain about things or demanding large risk premiums, and, as a result, investment isnt being done because its being priced in a crazy way. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. But in the Philadelphia model that you use? 
MR. DOTSEY. In the Philadelphia model where this is being soaked up as an inefficient investment shock that tells you that potential is going down a lot as well as output. MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Right. 
MR. DOTSEY. Im a little bit uncomfortable with that as the explanation, but thats what that particular New Keynesian model would say.  Im trying to remember, I think the model 
   at Chicago also has a big role for some of these investment-type technology shocks as well and whether they are  MR. EVANS. I would guess it does. MR. KOHN. How would it explain the decline in inflation, then? If potential has gone down along with output, why has inflation gone from whatever it is, 2 percent to 1 percent? MR. DOTSEY. Given that unemployment has gone up to 10 percent, and in Jeffs graphs you thought that we had this 8 percent drop in marginal cost, or some giant gap, the question would be: Why hasnt inflation gone from 2.2 percent to minus 2.2 percent, not from  2.2 percent to 1 percent? MR. LACKER. Well, the answer is always going to be our policy role, right? Isnt it? MR. KOHN. Weve changed targets? 
MR. LACKER. The answer to why inflation did what it did would be a combination of the model and our policy role. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Mike was kind enough to mention Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist earlier. [Laughter] I would point out that Mark and other coauthors have updated that paper to include exactly those kinds of shocks, and they get disinflation and all of those things.  And whats happening is that as there is a shock to the capital of the banking system that prevents credit from going through to purchasers, or small businesses, or consumers, or whatever, the drop in their demand is just a decline in the aggregate demand curve, and you get 
all the results you would expect from that. A two-hander from President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. Well, let me just say that I agree with many things that Mike just said, and, in fact, in the specification that Justiniano and Primiceri write down, the output gap is not a 
fundamental.  Its a constructed variable, and its really the marginal cost pricing, as Jeff mentioned, that is going to be fundamental for how firms are setting prices.  So thats absolutely right. Its also in the language that we as economic researchers are comfortable with, and we can lay it out and understand it quite well.  Part of what were getting into is how we communicate with other people and with the public, and resource slack tends to be a pretty good proxy in a number of cases, so I think thats why we keep coming back to it.  These memos are right to point out the cases where we are going to be misled by that, and then the question is:  How do we defend against that?  I think our track record is pretty good.  We always need to be reminded of this, and getting the models better would be great. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I really enjoyed this discussion and the papers. I thought they were really good.  Im going to review three things I said earlier on this issue and see if any of my views have changed, given those priors that I laid down before the discussion. One of the things I said earlier in a memo was that theoretical conceptions are hotly contestedthats just the state of play in the macro world.  Im actually happy to see a debate between the Philadelphia conception, the DSGE model, and the Chicago conceptionit lays out explicitly Heres what the assumptions are, and Im sorry its complicated, but there are lots of issues there. And thats where we are. But theres also the question of moving between models where you can pin down what the output gap isa clear theoretical conception versus the traditional concept of an output gap.  There you dont know what the mapping is back to the people youre trying to help with your policy, and I think thats harder to swallow.  And 
  estimates, given any concept, are subject to difficult measurement issues, and we understand that. The second thing I said was, Okay, forget about theory, you dont care about theory, blah, blah, blah. You just want to find an object that will help you predict inflation, and youre happy to use whatever this object is.  I think that, controlling for expectations, a gap is only a marginal contributor to movements in inflation.  I would say in the Fuhrer et al. work, one interpretation of the empirical relationships that you see is precisely that monetary policy did not react sufficiently strongly to offset whatever shock hit the economy to keep you close to the inflation target. One of the themes Ive come back to over and again is that if were doing inflation targeting or some kind of quasi-inflation targetingif thats what were doing if you run it really well and your tools are pretty effective, you should be able pretty much to offset all of the shocks and keep inflation really close to target.  You go back to run your regressions later and see what the relationships are. Its only going to look like inflation is related to the target or a constant. So I think that is an issue for the empirical workfor those who want to throw away the theory and just find variables that are going to help you predict inflation.  I think, frankly, that inflation targeting, or quasi-inflation targeting, has worked pretty well over the last 15 years or so in the United States. The third point I madea point on which the papers were particularly uninformativeis how gaps are related to bubbles, and that, I think, is uncharted territory.  A lot of our rhetoric says this is a housing bubble, the housing bubble somehow collapsed, and thats whats going on in this economy. I dont see models that have those kinds of bubbles in them.  To me, a bubble has to mean something about an equilibrium that is not the fundamental equilibriumtheres 
    this fundamental equilibrium in the economy, but somehow actual prices and actual expectations are up somewhere far away from that fundamental.  And then, that collapses on you, and you come back to the fundamental.  What does that mean?  Does that mean that youre back at your trend and you shouldnt try to reinflate the bubble, or what?  I think the Chairman has said that bubbles are one of the really tough issues of the decade for monetary policy, and I agree completely with that. The thing I was worried about for policy is that we might be overemphasizing output gaps in our policy discussions when we say blanket-type things like, Well, it looks like gaps are big, or It looks like resource utilization is really low compared with some conception of where we think it should be, and, therefore, there cant be any inflation in the near term or the medium term.  I think that might be an over-interpretation of what both the theoretical and the empirical literature tell us. I had comments on all of the papersIm going to shorten this up.  I just want to talk about the global slack hypothesis a little bit.  Weve been talking in the profession about globalization for years and years and years. I have to say that the conventional wisdom, the hallway discussion that you get on this, is that you can treat the U.S. like a closed economy and it is okay. I actually think that that has not been that bad an approach over the past 25 years, but we may be at an inflection point where that is not the right thing to do going forward. If youre going to look at empirical evidence thats collected over the past 25 years, youre going to get weak relationships with respect to the global output gaps or the global economy.  That may not be the right way to think of things going forward. I have also been concerned with the question of optimal policy in open economy settings, which I think has generally been deemphasized around the table here, for the reason I just gave, 
   for years, but that may not be the thing to do going forward.  In the fledgling literature on optimal policy and open economy models, you have always got a situation where youve got some domestic prices, youve got import prices, and then youre going to construct a price index that includes both. Should you be reacting to those import prices? Thats the question.  The models tell you no. The models say you should have some conception of domestic prices or whatever the sticky prices are in your economy and you should react to those.  The foreign central bank is already reacting to those prices in the foreign economy.  So when you react to the import prices, you are sort of doubly reacting, because foreign monetary policy is already trying to control those prices. So the fact that youre reacting back and forth then can create problems in the global equilibriuma bubble, if you like.  I worry about that, and I dont think that that has been thought about carefully enough, and I think it will become more and more important as we go forward, especially with the rise of Asia. Let me talk about the Fuhrer et al. paper for just a second.  He has got backward-looking expectations, a theme to which I am very sympathetic.  Youre thinking about trying to measure this perfectly forward-looking component during the Great Moderation, or during the past 15 years, a period where it may not be that important, because, in some sense, nothing happened 
during that period. But the question would be:  If you get to special times, is that really the way to think about expectations, as purely extrapolating from the past?  Theres a famous paper in macroeconomicssome of you will know itcalled The Ends of Four Big Inflations by Tom Sargent. He describes hyperinflations after World War I, when prices were going up like crazy.  The government makes a credible commitment on a day, and the hyperinflation ends at noon on that dayits just amazing.  So theres an example.  It is a hugely stressed situation, but rational expectations come in with a vengeance.  Are we in a highly stressed situation? Maybe. We 
 avoided Depression 2.0. You might interpret that as a very special situation relative to the past 25 years. Thats what has got me a little worried about a backward-looking approach to expectations. I think the threats of sharp movements in this kind of environment are very real.  We have to be careful about them.  Will they occur?  Maybe not.  But we need to be very careful 
in this situation. So thats just a comment on the Fuhrer approach.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Ill try to keep my comments brief.  I want to talk a little about what I took away from some of this.  I found the papers very interesting and fun to read and think about. One of the lessons I take away from thisand its one that Ive taken away for some time, and Jeff referred to itis that a little humility may be in order, in terms of our ability to truly understand particularly short-run dynamics in the inflation process. One of the things that I think we learned from this discussion is that, depending on the model that you write down, and depending on the nature of the shocks that you allow to hit that model, you can get different outcomes, you can get different relationships between variables within that model. That means that we need to be a little cautious in our interpretation about how we rely in our policy discussions on one set of variables versus another set of variables in guiding our outlooks for inflation. One of the things that I have tried to convey in some of my comments over the last several months is that I have been worried that in the way we talk about inflationparticularly the future of inflation and deflationwe have become a little too fixated on measures of output gaps.  One of the things we learned from this is that, depending on which output gap you write down and what you think of the shocks, other things may matter, so we 
need to be a little more careful about diversifying our portfolio about whats going to happen and protect ourselves from being put in a bad spot. 
So, I think humility is important.  I think the nature of the shocks is important.  I think the conversation between Governor Kohn and Mike Dotsey about what we think this shock is and what it did is a useful kind of conversation to have.  The problem comes when the output gap becomes a shorthand for a whole bunch of other stuff, and then it becomes a communication problem, because it may or may not be the right shorthand.  There may be circumstances where 
you need a different shorthand or a different measure.  And thats where talking about the nature 
of the shocks becomes useful in how we think about it. If you focus on traditional measures of the output gap, it seems to me there are circumstances where, with excessive emphasis on trying to close that gapIm not talking about the current circumstances, necessarilyyou may not be conducting policy in an optimal way or even increasing welfare. You may actually reduce welfare if you focus on the wrong metric or the wrong target with the gaps. So there may not be an easy, one-to-one correspondence at times between policy thats welfare improving and policy that closes gaps, and we need to be cautious about that. Charlie Evans commented earlier about taking other variables into account, and it is very important that we do that. The last comment Ill make is that I want to reinforce Janet Yellens point, because she and I agree on thissome people may find that unusual.  Given the uncertainty that we have about the class of models that we deal with, theres a lot of work on robust rules.  Some of the staff in San FranciscoJohn Williams and othershave worked hard on this.  I find this work very useful, because they take models where we actually can compute optimal policy, and then 
ask what happens: What kind of simple rules could we use that would get us close to something that looks like the optimal policy?  Theres been a great deal of work on this.  The simple rules they write down typically are of a Taylor rule variety with an output gap and a deviation of 
inflation from some target.  One thing that comes out of those robust rules, though, is that the answer is not that the output gap doesnt matter.  But in most of those exercises that Im familiar with, the weight on the output gap in the Taylor rule tends to be pretty small.  I think thats one of the things that is interesting about some of those rules.  The important thing about those robust 
rules is that the weight on the deviation from inflation target gets very big, and the weight on the output gap is relatively small in many cases. One of the helpful things that we could do is think about the class of robust rules and about how robust these rules are against the class of models that are on the table.  That could help focus our discussion and give us, again, this robustness in our policy thinking that could be very helpful.  So Im very positive towards that line of research in the literature, because, as we can see here today, models are different, and they can give different outcomes.  We need to be cautious about what we know and how precise we are and not put too much weight on any one factor at any one point in timediversify our portfolio, if you will.  Again, my argument for lo these many months is to try to get our language to look more robust and a little less focused on single metrics. I want to thank all of the Reserve Bank staff. They did a great job, and I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. MR. ROSENGREN. I also want to thank each of the presenters for giving very good presentations. Over breakfast, as Jeff alluded to, President Plosser and I had, I thought, a very useful discussion about models and what was generating our results.  I asked him, given where the output gap was, and given where at least some measures of marginal cost might be, how he 
was getting inflation actually rising.  And his answer was, Well, the driver is really inflation expectations. I have one question for each of you. It will be quick.  Let me posit my questions to each of you first, and then I will let you all speak.  My first question is for Mike.  Youve highlighted the difficulty with coming up with the output gap, and I think its well understood that there are a lot of ways to calculate the output gap, and there are estimation issues with the output gap.  But when I look at forecasts of inflationif I look at the Blue Chip, if I look at professional forecasters, if I look at the dispersion in surveysI find that the modeling of inflation expectations by economists isnt much better than the modeling of output gaps.  Gary Stern gave us the advice that you need a model to beat a model as he was leaving.  So were not very good at modeling expectations; it seems like we have much the same problem when modeling the output gap. Id like you to speak to the alternative, which is, how do we do a good job of modeling expectations, or what more work needs to be done? For Mark, my question is that, based on my understanding of at least some of the international literature, importers tend to price to the U.S. market.  If you could just put your work in the context of that observation, I think that would be useful for me. And for Jeff, in light of Mikes comments, and his paper, I would be interested in your views of the implications of the way you model inflation, given the alternative that Mike has laid out in his paper. MR. DOTSEY. Thats a really excellent question, which Im going to answer in three parts. In the models that were all looking at, expectations are rational.  To the extent that thats not a good approximation for how people actually form expectations, then thats problematic for the models as well.  People like Jim Bullard have worked on models of learning and other types 
 of things, and a lot of those models probably can be incorporated to try to flesh out expectational issues, if we become uncomfortable with the assumption of rational expectations at high frequencies. Expectations are a dicey thing for the Committee to base policy on, because often they can be somewhat sticky, as you allude to.  If the Committee were to lose some of its credibility, often those expectations could look good, but you could have lost the game, and expectations are going to get out of hand. I think the late 1970s and then the disinflation of the 1980s was an example of that.  The inflation sort of led the expectationswe had this big run-up in inflation, and expectations followed it. On the way down, I think expectations of inflation actually followed the Feds moves as it was gaining credibility and probably made the disinflationary costs in actuality a lot worse.  So I think you are right to point out those types of things, but, again, all I can do is say weve got these models on the table, and thats the best we can do.  And youre right to question perhaps some of the assumptions underlying what is going on. MR. WYNNE.  On the question of the pricing to the U.S. market, we actually do consider this case. One of the contributions in our background paper is to push some of the existing literature forward by explicitly incorporating the so-called local currency pricing assumptions as opposed to the producer currency pricing assumption. If you go back to exhibit 6 in our handout, thats what gives rise to these complicated additional terms in the Phillips curve expression to capture these deviations from the law of one 
price. If you dont have people pricing in dollars for the U.S. market, youre just going to have to worry about the domestic and foreign output gaps, or domestic and foreign real marginal 
costs. This is what makes it very tricky to test this idea that foreign influences matter, because you can also just write down a Phillips curve where all the foreign influences come in through a 
    terms-of-trade-like term.  But its a gapits a deviation of the terms of trade from its frictionless level. A lot of very subtle econometric issues come up then in trying to figure out why the terms-of-trade variable is in the Phillips curve expression.  Is it to capture deviations from the law of one price, or is it some sort of a summary statistic for all foreign slack?  I think it makes a big difference to the validity of the hypothesis. This was what motivated our final remark about why we really need to rethink some of the earlier econometric work, some of the good work that was done here at the Board of Governors, the work that the researchers at the BIS have done, and some of the earlier work we did on this question.  However, these terms-of-trade variables look like some of the variables people have traditionally included in Phillips curve regressions.  We know that oftentimes youre going to need to put in energy prices or import prices or food prices in your traditional Phillips curve to get the fit to work.  And the theoretical framework we have laid out explains why these things may, in fact, matter.  But a lot more work needs to be done before we could actually apply this to some of the policy issues Jeff and Mike have addressed in their presentations. MR. FUHRER. Thanks for your question, Eric.  I would take on board some of Michaels and coauthors caveats about the use of statistical gaps.  I think my approach would be somewhat similar to what the Chairman was saying in response to another questionwe wouldnt take a univariate approach in gauging the state of the economy.  Wed look to see whats going on with unemployment, and Id say its clearly elevated, and I dont see evidence in traditional measures of reallocation to suggest that anything extraordinary is going on there.  Therefore, I would take on board that a good portion, maybe the majority, of the increase in unemployment is really reflective of slack resources.  When I couple that with the observations 
  on marginal cost, which are severely depressed, I think I have several measures that all are telling me roughly the same story.  So in that regard, at least from the point of view that the gap or utilization is a driving variable, I would expect some downward pressure on inflation. Now, as we suggested in the discussion around the table, inflation expectations might counterbalance that, but I would emphasize in that regard, at two levels, that what I said in my presentation is that the implication of the models is that the inflation expectation really implies a concern for future marginal cost and gaps, not just inflation expectations per se.  Thats at the pointy-headed rational expectations level.  But lets take a step back and think, along the lines that President Narayana Kocherlakota was saying, about the importance of the microdata   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Narayana Rao Kocherlakota.  [Laughter] MR. FUHRER. Ill get the middle name next time.  [Laughter] The goal keeps increasing. At the micro level, lets think about the story that motivates these kinds of models that we use, which at its base is not unreasonable, and that is that there are firms who are trying to set prices. What do they consider in trying to set prices?  They think about their cost structure.  Thats where the marginal cost comes from.  I would say that today the cost structure really is challenged. Wages are pressured to be quite low, and productivity appears to be fairly high.  So from the cost side, that puts downward pressure.  The other thing that they take into account is how much they can mark up over those costs.  Thats a factor of market power and current demand circumstances.  And I would say, there again, the ability to mark up over their cost structure is not terrific. So you dont need the pointy-headed rational expectations model to tell you that the key determinants that fold into these models would suggest that, in current 
circumstances, the pressures on inflation, taking into account expectations and costs and gaps or whatever else, appear to be on the downside.  Thats the way I would answer that question. Now, I did say, as President Plosser emphasized, that we need to have some humility when we approach this. And I think that to date we are starting to see perhaps the beginning of a puzzle that says, as Mike Dotsey suggested, that inflation maybe should have fallen more than these models have suggested.  And I think well be looking at that carefully, because if it doesnt fall noticeably over the next year, we have some splaining to do.  [Laughter] And that will require some additional thought.  So thank you for the question, and thats what I would say. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Ricky Ricardo theory of economics.  [Laughter] President Hoenig.  MR. HOENIG. Thank you. Just a short observation.  This is, as others have said, very interesting in terms of inflation dynamics and output gaps.  And I agree that we need to use models and work them and then apply our judgment to the situation. But I also want to remind the Committee that we do need to begin to think differently in some ways.  I cant help but recall that in 2003 Borio and White gave a paper at the Jackson Hole Symposium on issues around not so much bubbles but very strong expansion and the conditions we create that cause these cycles, if you will.  It means that you can look at where interest rates are relative to at least an estimated long-term equilibrium rate and at how fast credit growth is moving in a particular period of time.  If you reread that paper now, you will think they were on to something.  While we need these output gaps, and so forth, the financial system is driving a lot of whats happening, and we need to bring that into the equation more directly.  Maybe thats what you were referring to regarding the updates to the papers that you have been involved with. 
  Theres more to it than the output gap, and Im a little worried, because of that, about making inflation targeting your goal, because you can have a very stable inflation environment for a while and have a very volatile financial environment with the excesses that go on there.  So I recommend that you all reread that paper.  Thank you. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you for reminding us about that.   Any other comments? [No response.] If not, let me once again thank the staff for all your work and for your coordination, and it was a very enjoyable discussion.  The next meeting is another two-day meeting, January 26 and 27.  The meeting is adjourned.  There is lunch available in the anteroom for those who can stay. Thank you. END OF MEETING 